1 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Created by 
Mike Franchina 


Game design 
Tuomas Pirinen 


Artwork 
Mike Franchina & Des Hanley 


Layout 
James Sherriff 


Additional editing 
Eleanor Marie 


This is a work of fiction. Trench Crusade is intended for mature audiences. 


Trench Crusade and all artwork copyright © 2024 Mike Franchina 
Trench Crusade playtest rules copyright © 2024 Tuomas Pirinen 


Playtest rules 


v1.5 


by Factory Fortress Inc. 


2 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


G 


reetings all, be you a faithful follower of the Church or servant of the 
Inferno! 
It is our pleasure to present to you the latest draft of the Trench 
Crusade playtest rules. Thank you for supporting the game! 
This draft covers the basic rules, most common weapons, armour and 
equipment, scenarios, keywords used in the game as well as several warband lists, not 
just the blasphemous Heretic Legion and the crazed Trench Pilgrims! We suggest you 
start with the Quick Start section of the rules to familiarise yourself with the basics. 
To state the obvious, these are not the final rules. They are missing explanatory 
diagrams and gameplay examples, campaign and exploration rules, supernatural 
powers, some warband lists and scenarios, terrain and miniature painting sections and 
much, much more. However, they should allow you to sample the game and learn its 
basics as we await the full release. 
Neither layout nor the art presents the final quality, and due to the constant cycle 
of playtesting and revisions, there are bound to be mistakes as well as plenty of rules 
that are going to change in the course of development. Please bear this in mind as you 
acquaint yourself with these rules. Feedback is welcome, and the best way is to join the 
Trench Crusade Discord channel and post your questions and comments there. We will 
strive to answer them to our best ability. 
We plan to release more playtest rules in the near future (including rules for all 
the models released in the initial Kickstarter), as well as more scenarios, warbands 
and rules for campaigns. We will also revise the core rules when they change during 
development and share these with the community as well. 
The best way to keep abreast of all the latest developments is to sign up to our 
newsletter at: www.trenchcrusade.com 
I hope you’ll enjoy your time with Trench Crusade. I firmly believe it is the best 
ruleset I’ve written in my 27-year career as a professional game designer. 


Tuomas Pirinen 


Join us in the trenches, pilgrim: 
www.facebook.com/trenchcrusadeofficial 
https://discord.gg/TveDjJpk 


G 


3 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


4 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


rench Crusade is a skirmish-scale tabletop 
miniature game that will plunge players 
deep into a horrifying alternate timeline. 
During the Crusades a heretical band of 
Templars dared defy the Almighty. Casting 
aside their sacred vows they unleashed the forces of Hell 
upon the Earth. 


Over 800 years later, in the Year of Our Lord 1914, this 
brutal, merciless war between the forces of Heaven and 
Hell rages on. This is not merely a fight for survival – it 
is a cataclysmic struggle that will decide the very fate of 
humanity’s soul. 


The following rules will immerse you in the trenches, 
guiding your warband through fierce skirmish battles as 
you vie for supremacy in No Man’s Land. 


What You Need To Play 


Miniatures 
Each player commands a Warband, which typically 
consists of 6-20 models. While there is no ironclad rule 
on the scale of models, the heroic 32mm scale is what 
we use in our games. If you prefer another scale, do not 
worry – Witchburners will not be dispatched to cleanse 
you for your lack of scale purity! 


Tabletop 
You will also need a gaming surface to play on. We 
suggest two surface sizes for games: 48” x 48” or 36” 
x 36”. This allows the game to be played on a typical 
kitchen table. 


Terrain 
Terrain is also necessary, and the more you have of it, the 
better! Trench Crusade is a game of position and tactics, 
so different types of elevation, cover and varied terrain 
pieces will all enhance your gaming experience. 


Measuring tool 
To measure distances, you will need a tape measure 
or measuring stick. Trench Crusade uses the Imperial 
measurement system which means movement is 
measured in inches. 


Dice 
Next, you will require dice. Each player should have 
eight 6-sided dice (D6s) in their own distinct colours. 


Blood Marker Dice 
Finally, you will need a few red 6-sided dice to represent 
BLOOD MARKERS (explained in the rules below). 


Game Turn & Activations 


Players Activate their models in alternating order. A 
single Turn consists of both players Activating all their 
models once. 
For example, the first player will choose a model to 
Activate, take any ACTIONS available to the model, and 
then it is time for the next player to activate one of their 
models. 
You can then choose any model in your warband (that 
has not yet been Activated) and Activate that model. 
This model can now Move, take ACTIONS and use 
special skills and equipment as you see fit. When your 
model’s Activation is over, your opponent can then 
Activate one of their models and so on. 


The player with the lowest number of models currently 
remaining on the table will decide who will start with 
the first Activation at the beginning of each Turn. If 
both players have the same number of models, roll a D6 
and whoever rolls highest gets to decide. 


When each player has Activated all their models, the 
Turn is over. 


Actions 
Once Activated a model can take as many or as few 
ACTIONS during each Activation as you wish, in any 
order you choose. However, each ACTION can only be 
taken once per Activation unless otherwise stated in the 
rules. Thus you could fire your weapon, then Move and 
then Dash during the same Activation, or Dash and then 
Charge and so on. 


Common ACTIONS that all models can take are listed 


Playtest rules 


T 


Keywords 


Many weapons, troop types, 


equipment and armour have 


associated Keywords. These are 


always depicted clearly in capital 


letters. For example, all large and 


cumbersome weapons have the 


Keyword HEAVY. This allows 


the player to separate lore and 


general descriptions from rules. 


Thus, if the rules dictate that 


“No model carrying a HEAVY 


weapon can add D6 to their 


charge move”, this applies to every 


single weapon with said Keyword. 


Refer to the Keywords section on 


page 12 for the full list to see their 


effects on gameplay. 


5 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Melee Weapon’s entry in the rules. The attacker must 
be able to see at least part of the target – no Melee 
attacks through walls! 


; Any other ACTIONS: Many models have other 
possible ACTIONS they can take during their 
Activations. Refer to the Warband Lists for details. 


Risky Actions: If you fail a RISKY ACTION, this 
always ends the activation of the model and your 
opponent can now activate one of their models! 


+Dice and -Dice 


Rules often have modifiers to dice rolls marked as 
+DICE and -DICE (for example, shooting from elevated 
positions adds +1 DICE to ranged attacks against 
enemies below). These are shown in the format of 
+1 DICE and -1 DICE. Many models have them on 
their profile for Melee and Ranged attacks, and things 
like range, cover and so on can apply them to the dice 
rolls you make on the Action Success Chart or Injury 
Chart. For each +DICE, add one dice to the dice pool 
of the 2D6 roll you are about to make. Thus +1 DICE 
makes the roll a total of 3D6. Then roll all the dice and 
pick the two highest numbers. If two +DICE are added, 
roll 4D6 and pick the two highest and so on. 


The -DICE works in reverse. For each -1 DICE, add 
one dice to the dice pool of the 2D6 roll you are about 


below. Be sure to consult the profile of each warrior in 
your warband to see what ACTIONS their abilities allow 
them to perform in addition to these. 


Some ACTIONS are classed as RISKY ACTIONS and 
these are noted as such. RISKY ACTIONS require 
you to roll on the Action Success Chart (see below) 
to see if you succeed. On a success, the model performs 
the RISKY ACTION successfully. On a failure, the 
Activation of the model ends immediately before taking 
the RISKY ACTION! 


; Move: When a model takes this ACTION during 
its activation, choose one of the three options below. 
The Move ACTION does not require a roll on the 
Action Success Chart. 


Standard Move: The model moves up to its 
Movement characteristic. 


Charge: Choose an enemy model (that the 
charging model can see) within 12” as the target. 
The charging model then moves directly toward 
that target via the shortest and most effective 
route possible determined by distance, with 
a D6” bonus to its Movement characteristic. 
This movement can allow the charging model 
to move within 1” of the target, putting the 
two models in Melee Combat with each other. 
A model cannot Charge if they have taken the 
Make a Ranged Attack ACTION during this 
Activation, unless they made a single ranged 
attack with a weapon that has the Keyword 
ASSAULT. 


Retreat: The model moves up to its Movement 
characteristic and it may leave Melee Combat 
during this movement. Each enemy model in 
Melee Combat with the retreating model may 
immediately take a Melee Attack ACTION with 
a single melee weapon that it has. Resolve the 
effects of this attack before moving the retreating 
model. 


; Dash: The model must succeed with a RISKY 
ACTION. If successful, the model takes the Standard 
Move ACTION as described above. This can be done 
in addition to any other ACTION. 
; Make a Ranged Attack: The model may shoot 
with a ranged weapon that it is equipped with. A 
model engaged in Melee Combat cannot shoot. 
A model cannot make a Ranged Attack during an 
Activation in which they have Charged, unless they 
made a single ranged attack with a weapon that has 
the Keyword ASSAULT. 


; Make a Melee Attack: If the model is engaged 
in Melee combat, it may attack as detailed in the 


Pre-measuring 


Unless the rules specifically tell 


you otherwise, you are allowed to 


measure distances to see if you are 


in range for shooting, charging 


and so on. 


Climbing & Jumping 


During any movement made by a 


model, it can climb surfaces, jump 


across gaps and down ledges to 


navigate the battlefield. Climbing 


up and down surfaces or jumping 


across gaps costs movement as 


normal. Jumping down doesn’t 


cost movement but might be 


dangerous based on the height of 


the jump (see page 7 for detailed 


rules). 


Action Success Chart 


When you take an ACTION (including Melee 
and Ranged Attacks), roll 2D6 and add any 
+DICE or -DICE from the character’s profile, 
injuries or other sources, pick the two highest (or 
lowest if any -DICE were applied) and consult 
the chart below to see if the ACTION succeeded: 


2-6 
Failure 
7-11 
Success 
12+ 
Critical success: Ranged and Melee 
Attacks add +1 DICE to injury 
rolls if your result is a Critical Success 
when determining if they hit. 


If you succeed, you take the ACTION as 
described in the rules. If you fail, you can still 
move or take any other ACTIONS the model 
may have access to. If the ACTION is classed as a 
RISKY ACTION and you fail, the activation of 
the model is over and your opponent can now 
activate one of their models! 


6 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


to make. Thus -1 DICE makes the roll a total of 3D6. 
Then roll all the dice and pick the two lowest numbers. 
If -2 DICE are added, roll 4D6 and pick the two 
lowest and so on. 


Gameplay example: A Trench Pilgrim model is shooting 
at a Heretic trooper with a musket. The Heretic is in cover, 
which grants -1 DICE to any ranged attacks. The Pilgrim 
rolls 3D6 and gets 5, 5 and 1. The two lowest numbers are 
picked for a result of 6. As the Pilgrim needed 7 to hit, the 
shot missed! 
Before rolling dice, add any +DICE and -DICE to the 
dice pool. If the pool contains both +DICE and -DICE, 
remove pairs of opposite dice until only one type is 
remaining. 


Blood Markers 


During a battle your warriors can be wounded due to 
enemy attacks, the use of supernatural powers, falling 
from great heights and so on – see the Injury Chart for 
details. This damage is tracked via BLOOD MARKERS. In 
addition to wounds, they represent exhaustion, concussion, 
shellshock, physical and mental strain and so on. 


Each time one of your models suffers such damage, place a 
BLOOD MARKER (red dice) next to the model to track this 
damage. Use the pip number on each dice to indicate the 
number of BLOOD MARKERS the model has. Every time 
this model takes an ACTION (shooting, melee attacks and 
so on), your opponent can declare that they are spending 
one or more BLOOD MARKERS it has to add -1 DICE to 
the dice pool when the roll on the Action Success Chart 
is made. Multiple markers can be applied to any single roll 
if the target model has multiple BLOOD MARKERS to be 
converted. 


The BLOOD MARKERS can also be used by your 
opponent when the model suffers damage from any 
source. Each marker can be converted into +1 DICE on 
the Injury Chart roll, making a serious injury far more 
likely and, just like with ACTIONS, multiple markers can 
be used to influence a single roll on the Injury Chart. 


BLOODBATH 
You can roll an additional D6 on injury rolls at the 
cost of six BLOOD MARKERS on any model, or at the 
cost of three BLOOD MARKERS if the target is Down. 
This means that instead of rolling 2D6 on your typical 
weapon, you roll 3D6 on your injury roll and add the 
numbers together. Weapons such as the Artillery Witch’s 
Infernal Bomb would therefore roll 4D6 and add the 
results together (3D6+1D6). 


Gameplay Example: A Trench Pilgrim model has 
sustained a wound during the battle and has two BLOOD 


MARKERS on them. A Heretic Trooper shoots at the 
Pilgrim with his trusty bolt action rifle, rolls an 8 and 
hits! The Heretic player decides to use one of the BLOOD 
MARKERS to make the shot more likely to injure. The 
Heretic player rolls 3D6 (2D6 +1 DICE from the spent 
marker) and consults the Injury Chart. The result is 4, 5 
and 1. Since one +DICE was used, the player picks the two 
highest numbers which total 9. The Pilgrim is taken out of 
action! 


Blessing Markers 


BLESSING MARKERS are similar to BLOOD 
MARKERS. Supernatural powers, holy relics and many 
other sources may grant these to a model, which can 
then be expended to aid the ACTIONS of the model. 


Every time the model takes an ACTION (shooting, 
dashing, melee attacks and so on), you can declare 
that they are spending one or more of any BLESSING 
MARKERS the model has. You can add +1 DICE to the 
dice pool when any roll on the Action Success Chart 
is made. Additionally, whenever the opponent makes 
an injury roll against a model, that model may spend a 
BLESSING MARKER to apply a -1 DICE penalty to 
that injury roll. Multiple BLESSING MARKERS can be 
applied to any single roll if the target model has more 
than one BLESSING MARKER. 


Movement 


All models in the game can Move when Activated unless 
otherwise indicated in the rules. Each model can move 
up to the number of inches indicated in their profile, 
though they can move less and not at all if you wish. 
There are a number of general rules that apply to all of 
the movement that a model takes during its Activation. 
Certain types of movement, such as Falling or the 
knockback effect of an Artillery Witch’s Infernal Bomb, 
are not subject to these rules. Regardless of the type 
of movement, a model cannot move off the battlefield 
unless a rule specifically states so. 
; A model cannot enter Melee Combat (within 1” 
of enemy models) unless it Charges. 
; A model cannot leave Melee Combat (within 1” 
of enemy models) at any point during Movement 
unless it is Retreating. 
; A model in Melee Combat cannot otherwise 
move unless they began their Activation in Melee 
Combat, take the standard Move ACTION and 
remain in Melee Combat with every model that 
they were in Melee Combat with at the start of their 
Activation. 
; A model can move through friendly models if it 


Denied Rule 


A situation may occur where 


different rules and abilities 


conflict with each other creating 


a rules impasse. A rule might 


require a model to do something, 


while another rule says it cannot 


do this. In these situations the 


prohibition takes precedence. If a 


model cannot do something, this 


overrides any rule that says it must 


do another action. 


Fractions 


In all cases where the rules refer 


to fractions, always round up to 


the nearest whole number when 


necessary. For example, if your 


warband has nine models and the 


rule calls for something to effect 


half of the entire force, round 


4.5 models up to 5. On the other 


hand, if a model with a Move- 


ment characteristic of 9” had its 


movement halved, that could 


become 4.5” without needing to 


round to a whole number. 


Going Over the Top 


All trenches are considered to 


have fire steps and footholds, and 


therefore climbing out of them 


requires no RISKY ACTION 


7 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


has enough movement to move past them entirely. 
; A model cannot move off the battlefield unless a 
rule specifically states so. 


Movement (including charging) is usually the only 
action a model can take that does not require you to roll 
2D6 to determine whether you are successful or not, 
unless otherwise noted in the rules. 


; Charging: Select an enemy model that is within 
12” of the charging model to be the target. If the 
charging model does not have line of sight to its 
target, it must succeed with a RISKY ACTION 
before proceeding. Roll a D6 (the charge roll) 
and add it to the charging model’s Movement 
characteristic (with a maximum distance of 12”). 
The charging model must move this distance toward 
the target by the shortest and most effective route 
possible by distance. Jumping, Climbing or moving 
through Dangerous Terrain is always optional during 
a Charge, even if it is the shortest route, though the 
new route avoiding such obstacles must still be as 
short as possible. 


If after completing this movement the charging 
model is within 1” of the target, the charging model 
is considered to have successfully charged the target 
and is now in Melee Combat. If the charging model 
does not reach its target, the Charge is considered 
to have failed, but it remains where it is after the 
movement. 


; Charging Multiple Enemies: A model may 
target multiple enemies with a single Charge if there 
is a space that the charging model could occupy 
(within 12”) that would place it in Melee Combat 
with every target of its Charge. It still only makes a 
single Charge. 


; Interposing Models during a Charge: If a 
charging model would pass within 1” of an enemy 
model that is not the target of its Charge, its charge 
immediately ends and it is considered to have 
charged the interposing model instead. 


; Diving Charge: If a charging model jumps 
down as part of a Charge, it landed within 2” of its 
target and it jumped from a ledge that was at least 3” 
(measured from the target’s base) and no more than 
6” (measured from the charging model’s landing 
space), it may convert its Charge into a Diving 
Charge. 


Place the charging model in any space within 1” of 
the target and take a RISKY ACTION. If successful, 
the charging model gains a +1 DICE bonus to hit 
and to injure the target, and the charging model 
ignores the target’s Defended Obstacle bonus (if it 
has one) for the remainder of its Activation. If the 


RISKY ACTION fails, the model is Down and is 
injured as per the rules for Falling. 


; Climbing: A model can move up or down 
ladders, ramps, ropes, stairs and other devices meant 
for climbing as a normal part of any movement it 
takes. This costs movement as normal. As a RISKY 
ACTION, a model may also attempt to climb up or 
down sheer surfaces, such as walls, but it must have 
enough remaining movement to clear the entire 
height. If this RISKY ACTION fails, the model 
remains where it is. 


; Jumping Over Gaps: As a RISKY ACTION, 
a model can jump across a gap of up to half their 
movement characteristic (measured horizontally). 
This costs movement as normal and can be taken as 
any kind of movement that the model has. A model 
cannot attempt to jump a gap that it does not have 
enough movement to clear. If this RISKY ACTION 
fails, the model falls as if it fell from a ledge on either 
side of the gap of the opponent’s choice. 


; Jumping Between Ledges of Unequal Heights: 
If the ledge that the model is jumping to is lower 
than the ledge that it is jumping from, apply the 
rules for Jumping Down after the model jumps the 
gap. If the ledge that the model is jumping to is 
higher than the ledge that it is jumping from, it can 
only be up to 1” higher and, if that ledge is at least 
½” higher, the jump costs an extra 1” of movement. 


; Jumping Down: A model can voluntarily ‘fall’ 
from a ledge that it is in base contact with. This 
never costs movement and can be done as part of 
any movement that the model has. Additionally, 
when falling from heights of up to 3” in this way, it 
does not make an injury roll. 


Falling 
When a model falls, it is moved from its current position 
to the first space that it can occupy directly beneath it or 
the ledge that it fell from. If it fell from a height greater 
than 2”, it must roll on the Injury Chart. For every 3” 
fallen, add +1 DICE to this injury roll (for example, a 
fall of 3” would be rolled with +1 DICE and a fall of 6” 
with +2 DICE). 


A model can fall through its own action, such as when 
it fails a RISKY ACTION when jumping over gaps 
or when jumping down a distance greater than 3”. A 
model in an elevated position may also fall when it is 
Downed while within 1” of a ledge. When this happens, 
the model takes an ACTION. If it succeeds, the model 
remains Downed where it is. If it fails, the model falls 
from the nearest ledge. 


Model Accuracy 


When it comes to making sure 


the models in your game match 


their stated size, actual equipment 


and weapons and armour, we 


recommend the following maxim: 


“Be strict with yourself but 


lenient with others”. 


8 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Terrain 


There are four types of terrain in Trench Crusade: Open, 
Difficult, Dangerous and Impassable. 


; Open: Open terrain is the most common terrain 
is Trench Crusade. Models can move freely through 
Open terrain. This includes crossing obstacles of up 
to 1” high, which does not cost movement. 
; Difficult: This includes rock beds, swamps, 
barbed wire and so on. Moving through Difficult 
Terrain costs double the normal movement of the 
model. 
; Dangerous: This includes barbed wire, 
minefields, raging fires, areas covered in poisonous 
gas and so on. Whenever a model moves into, or 
starts its Activation in, Dangerous Terrain, it must 
take an ACTION. On a failure, make an injury 
roll for the model. If the model moved into the 
Dangerous Terrain, this ACTION is RISKY. 
; Impassable: Models cannot pass through 
Impassable terrain. 


Terrain can be both Difficult and Dangerous. 


Movement types 
There exist two movement types currently in Trench 
Crusade: Infantry and Flying. A model can only have 
one movement type. If it gains a movement of another 
type, it must choose which movement it keeps. 


; Infantry: This movement type covers every 
model that walks, crawls or gallops along the 
ground. Models with this movement type obey all of 
the typical rules for movement. 
; Flying: This movement type covers every 
model that flies with wings, floats with magic or 
otherwise hovers above the ground. Flying models 
treat Difficult and/or Dangerous Terrain as Open 
Terrain and they do not trigger mines and similar 
devices. Flying models can climb up and down and 
they can jump over gaps of up to their Movement 
characteristic without taking ACTIONS. 


Combat 


Combat is divided into Ranged and Melee Combat. A 
model may fight in Melee Combat or with any ranged 
weapons it has. 


Ranged Attacks 
To shoot at an enemy, a model must have a ranged 
weapon and be able to see the target. If the model has 
multiple ranged weapons, you can shoot one of them per 
Activation. The only way to check what your model can 
see is to stoop over the tabletop for a model’s eye view for 


actual line of sight. 


Models in Melee combat cannot shoot unless the rules 
of the weapon indicate otherwise. Some indirect fire 
weapons have rules that allow you to target models even 
out of sight – these are clearly explained in the profile for 
such weapons. Models can see all around themselves (i.e. 
360°) and they may be turned freely to face any direction 
before firing. 


When making a ranged attack follow these steps: 


1. Choose one Ranged Weapon ACTION, declare a 
target and check line of sight. 


2. Check if the target is in range of the weapon. 


3. Roll on the Action Success Chart as standard. 


4. If you hit the enemy, roll on the Injury Chart (see 
below). 


5. If the weapon can shoot multiple times per 
Activation, resolve the shots one at a time. 


Modifiers 


; Enemy behind Cover: Add -1 DICE to the 
roll. A model is in cover whenever it is in contact 
with a piece of scenery that is at least as long as the 
model’s base. If an attacker can see a model in its 
entirety, this penalty does not apply. A model cannot 
gain cover merely from being obscured due to angles, 
distant scenery or the surface that they are standing 
on (such as when standing on top of a building). 


; Long Range: If the target is more than half the 
weapon’s maximum range, add -1 DICE to the 
roll to determine if the attack hits. 


; Shooting from an elevated position: Add +1 
DICE to hit rolls if the model is taking the shot from 
a position more than 3” above the target. 


Melee Combat 
An activated model can use any of its Melee ACTIONS 
if it is in contact with (i.e. within 1” of ) one or more 
enemies. Select any melee weapon or attack action 
available to the model – these are clearly indicated in the 
characteristics of each weapon entry. 


1. Declare which melee action you are taking and 
what opposing model you are targeting. 


2. Roll on the Action Success Chart using any 
melee attacks available to the model. Add any +/- 
DICE from any source such as BLOOD MARKERS, 
profile of the warrior making the attack etc. 


Shooting into Melee 


If you shoot at any models 


engaged in melee, roll a D6 for 


each shot (or automatic hit) to 


determine which model is hit: 


On a 1-3, the attack targets one 


of your models at random within 


1” of the target, on a 4-6, the 


attack targets an enemy model at 


random within 1” of the target. 


Resolve the attack as normal once 


the target is determined. 


9 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Injury Chart 


If your attack hits the enemy, it is time to 
determine the amount of damage the attack has 
caused. Roll 2D6 (plus any +/-DICE from the 
model’s profile or other sources), pick the two 
highest (or lowest if any -DICE were applied) 
and consult the following table: 


1 (or less) 
No effect 
2-6 
Minor Hit 
7-8 
Down 
9+ 
Out of Action 


Note: On occasion, a rule will ask you to total 
more (or less) than 2D6 to determine the 
outcome of a roll. If the dice roll is modified by 
+/- DICE, modify the dice pool as normal and 
keep the highest or lowest number of dice equal 
to the number of dice in the starting dice pool. 
For example, if the rule asked you to roll a total 
of 3D6 with +1 DICE, you would roll four dice 
and keep and total the highest three dice. 


Modifiers to Injury Chart rolls (cumulative): 


; Trench Shield: -1 to injury rolls (can be 
combined with any Armour) 
; Standard Armour: -1 to injury rolls 
; Reinforced Armour: -2 to injury rolls 
; Machine Armour: -3 to injury rolls (not 
cumulative with a shield) 
; TOUGH: If a TOUGH model would be 
taken Out Of Action, it is knocked Down 
instead. After a TOUGH model has been 
knocked Down in this way once, it can be 
taken Out of Action as normal. 
; Target is Down: Add +1 DICE to the 
dice pool when determining injuries for a 
model that is Down. 
; Bloodbath: Roll an additional D6 
and add it to the injury roll total. Costs six 
BLOOD MARKERS (three if the target is 
Down). 


No Effect 
The armour of the target withstands the hit. 
There is no effect. 


Minor Hit 
Add +1 BLOOD MARKER next to the model to 
represent a wound. Use the dice pips to count the 


hits inflicted (maximum six per model). 


Whenever the wounded model takes an 
ACTION, the opponent can decide to spend one 
or more of the BLOOD MARKERS to add -1 
DICE to the roll for each of them (i.e. roll 3D6 
and pick the two lowest results if you use one 
marker). 


When rolling on the Injury Chart against this 
model, the opponent can spend one or more of 
the BLOOD MARKERS to add +1 DICE to the 
roll for each pip. This makes a severe injury more 
likely. When you attack a wounded model, you 
can spend one or more of the markers to add +1 
DICE to the attack roll for each marker. 


Warrior Down! 
Place +1 BLOOD MARKER next to the model 
and the model goes Down. If the model is already 
Down, it instead suffers +2 BLOOD MARKERS 
and remains Down. A model that is Down suffers 
a -1 DICE penalty to all of its ACTIONS. Also 
it cannot move during its Activation through its 
own ACTIONS. 


The Down condition can either be represented 
by placing an indicator next to the model (such 
as a scrap of paper) or by physically turning the 
model face-down on its side. A model turned 
on its side will present a different profile for 
Line-of-Sight targeting, but these two methods 
of indication are otherwise identical and the 
model’s controller may decide which to use. 


At the start of its own Activation, a Downed 
warrior can Stand, but any movement (Move, 
Dash, Charge, Jump, Climb etc.) it can take is 
halved. If a model is Downed during its own 
Activation, it may attempt a RISKY ACTION in 
order to Stand. Otherwise, it remains Down for 
the remainder of its Activation. 


Out of Action 
The warrior suffers a major wound and is out 
of the game for the rest of the battle – remove 
the model from the table. Resolve what has 
happened to the model after the battle as 
explained in the Serious Injuries section of the 
rules. 


10 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


3. If the result is successful, roll on the Injury Chart 
to determine what happens to the target (unless 
some Equipment or Special Ability of the model 
indicates otherwise). 


Modifiers 


; Defended obstacle: Add -1 DICE to the 
roll. The target of a melee attack is considered to 
be defending an obstacle if it is not Down, it is 
touching an obstacle, that obstacle is at least ½” high 
(measured from the target’s base) and that obstacle 
is between it and its attacker. Common examples of 
such obstacles are stone walls, earthen ramparts and 
trenches. Simple hedges, bushes or low fences are 
often not enough. 
; Off-Hand Weapons: Add -1 DICE to the roll 
if the attack was made with an Off-Hand Weapon. 


Generally, each model can only attack once in melee, but 
some can execute multiple attacks due to their natural 
abilities or special weapons. 


Two Melee Weapons: A model armed with two melee 
weapons can take two separate Melee Attack ACTIONS, 
one with each weapon. One of these weapons, 
determined before you make your first ACTION roll, 
is an Off-Hand weapon. Off-Hand weapons suffer -1 
DICE to hit. 


If a STRONG model wields a two-handed melee weapon 
in one hand and a one-handed melee weapon in the 
other, the one-handed weapon is always regarded as 
the Off-Hand weapon. Resolve attacks made by a model 
wielding two melee weapons one at a time, with the Off- 
Hand weapon last. 


Moving in combat: If a model is in Melee combat at the 
start of their Activation, they may use their Standard 
Move ACTION while staying within 1” of the enemies 
they are engaged in combat with. This is most often 
used to negate the Defended Obstacle bonus. No roll is 
needed to do this. 


End of Activation 


Once you have moved the model and taken all 
ACTIONS you wish, or have failed with any of your 
RISKY ACTIONS, the Activation of the model ends and 
your opponent can now Activate one of their models. 
Keep Activating models as long as either player has any 
inactivated models left. 


Once you and your opponent have Activated all of your 
models once, go to the Morale Phase. 


Morale 


Your warband may abandon the battle if it suffers too 
many casualties. At the end of any Turn, when at least 
half of your warband is Down or Out of Action, roll on 
the Action Success Chart. 


If you fail, your warband flees the battlefield and loses 
the battle immediately. If both warbands are required to 
take this test, the smaller warband tests first. 


Optional Rule: A warband that loses a Morale Test can 
decide, instead of fleeing, that their warband is Shaken. 
Actions taken by models in a Shaken warband are 
considered RISKY ACTIONS. 


After one turn, the warband recovers to its normal state 
and is no longer considered Shaken. If it fails a Morale 
test again (shaken or not), it flees as standard. 


End of Turn 


Once both players have Activated all the models in their 
force once, the turn ends and a new turn begins. The 
player with the lowest number of models in their force 
starts the new turn and selects a model to activate. 


“Blessed are the warriors, for they 
shall bathe in the crimson rivers of 
victory.” 


- Battle Psalms 27:8 


11 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


12 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


K 


eywords define the core abilities, rules, 
troop types and damage categories in the 
game. Each of them is shared by several 
models/weapons/equipment and are 
called out with a Keyword. This makes it 
easy for you to differentiate between descriptive terms 
and game rules. A model or a weapon may have multiple 
Keywords. Rules governing all Keywords in the game are 
listed here. 


+DICE: Modifier for ACTION rolls. For each +DICE, 
add one dice to the dice pool of the 2D6 roll you are 
about to make. +1 DICE thus makes the roll a total of 
3D6. Then roll all the dice and pick the two highest. 
If two +DICE are added, roll 4D6 and pick the two 
highest, and so on. 


-DICE: Modifier for ACTION rolls. For each -DICE, 
add one dice to the dice pool of the 2D6 roll you are 
about to make. Thus -1 DICE makes the roll a total of 
3D6. Then roll all the dice and pick the two lowest. If 
two -DICE are added, roll 4D6 and pick the two lowest, 
and so on. 


ACTION: Covers attacking with Melee and Ranged 
Weapons, Dashing and any other activity where the 
player must roll on the Action Success Chart to make 
an Action. This roll can be modified by the opposing 
player by using BLOOD MARKERS. Each marker causes 
-1 DICE penalty to the roll. 


ARTIFICIAL: This model is not of natural origin but is 
instead constructed from non-organic elements. 


ASSAULT: Ranged attacks made with weapons that have 
this Keyword do not prevent a model from charging 
during the same activation. A charge may only be made 
if a single ranged attack is made with a weapon with this 
Keyword, regardless of any other rules that the weapon 
might have. 


BLACK GRAIL: This model is part of the Black Grail 
faction. 


BLAST (X): A weapon with BLAST (X) has an area 
of effect with a radius of inches indicated by X. If this 
weapon targets a model, this radius is measured from 


the centre of that model’s base in all directions. If this 
weapon targets a point on the ground, this radius is 
measured from that point in all directions, including 
vertically. If the Attack ACTION with this weapon is 
successful, it hits every model within this radius that the 
target (either model or point) has line of sight to (i.e. not 
completely blocked by terrain). 


BLESSING MARKER: Supernatural or chemical 
temporary enhancement. Each marker can be converted 
into +1 DICE for any ACTION the model takes, or into 
-1 DICE when rolling injuries for this model. 


BLOOD MARKER: Damage inflicted by attacks. Each 
can be converted into -1 DICE for any ACTION the 
wounded model takes or into +1 DICE when rolling 
injuries for this model. 


CONSUMABLE: An item with this keyword can only be 
used once. After the battle, any items with this keyword 
that were used are lost. 


CRITICAL: When attacking with a weapon with this 
keyword, add +2 DICE (instead of 1) to any injury rolls 
the weapon causes if you roll a Critical (i.e. 12+) on the 
Action Success Chart. 


CUMBERSOME: Model always requires two hands to 
use this weapon, even if the model has the Keyword 
STRONG. A weapon with the Keyword CUMBERSOME 
ignores this restriction when benefitting from the Shield 
Combo rule. 


ELITE: The most senior and heroic models of the 
warband. They have different rules for experience and 
advancement, and often enjoy a different weapon, 
armour and equipment selection. 


FEAR: Enemies of models with this Keyword suffer -1 
DICE in melee combat against this model. Some units 
are immune to this effect. Models that cause FEAR are 
not affected by FEAR themselves. 


FIRE: A model hit by a weapon with this Keyword 
suffers a BLOOD MARKER in addition to any other 
effects of the attack. The model suffers this BLOOD 
MARKER even if the attack has no other effects or is 
otherwise negated. Some equipment or abilities can 


Keywords 


K 


13 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


negate the additional BLOOD MARKER caused by this 
Keyword. 


FIRETEAM: This model is part of a Fireteam made up 
of two models. All models that are part of this Fireteam 
can be activated at the same time without the opponent 
getting their turn in between. They can take their 
ACTIONS in any order they wish, switching between the 
two models. Note that if the activation of either member 
of the Fireteam forcefully ends (due to a failed RISKY 
ACTION for example), it ends both Activations. Allies 
cannot be part of a Fireteam. 


GAS: A model hit by a weapon with this Keyword suffers 
a BLOOD MARKER, in addition to any other effects of 
the attack. The model suffers this BLOOD MARKER even 
if the attack has no other effects or is otherwise negated. 
Some equipment or abilities can negate the additional 
BLOOD MARKER caused by this Keyword. 


GRENADE: Grenade-type weapons ignore penalties for 
cover and long range. They do not count towards the 
number of ranged weapons a model can carry and do not 
have to be held in your hand at all times. A model armed 
with grenades can use them as many times as they wish. 


HEAVY: If carrying a weapon, armour or equipment with 
this Keyword, the model cannot move/dash and shoot 
during its Activation, and the model cannot roll D6 and 
add it to the Charge move. A model can only carry one 
item with this Keyword. 


HERETIC: The model is a member of the Heretic Legion 
faction. 


INFILTRATOR: Models with this Keyword can be 
deployed anywhere on the table out of line of sight 
of any enemies, but at least 8” away from the closest 
enemy. They are deployed after all other models without 
this Keyword. If any infiltrators cannot be deployed 
according to these restrictions then those models can 
always be placed in your deployment zone. If a scenario 
does not allow for infiltrators, deploy models with this 
Keyword during standard deployment as if they didn’t 
have this Keyword. 


NEW ANTIOCH: This model is part of the New Antioch 
faction. 


PILGRIM: This model is part of the Pilgrim faction. 


LIMIT (X): You can only purchase as many of this 
piece of equipment/weapon/armour as indicated by 
the number in parenthesis for your warband. If you find 
more via looting/exploration, you can break this limit. 


RISKY ACTION: If you fail your roll on the Action 
Success Chart when taking this ACTION, the Activation 
of this model ends immediately. 


SHRAPNEL: A model hit by a weapon with this 
Keyword suffers a BLOOD MARKER, in addition to 
any other effects of the attack. The model suffers this 
BLOOD MARKER even if the attack has no other effects 
or is otherwise negated. Some equipment or abilities can 
negate the additional BLOOD MARKER caused by this 
Keyword. 


SKIRMISHER: When a model with this Keyword is 
targeted by an enemy’s Charge, it may immediately 
move D3” in any direction, except into Melee Combat. 
A Skirmisher may also make this move when a charging 
enemy model would enter Melee Combat with it during 
a Charge that is not targeting it. After either of these 
moves is resolved, the Charge continues as normal 
toward the original target. These moves can only be 
taken if the Skirmisher is not in Melee Combat and only 
one such move may be taken per Charge. 


STRONG: A model with this Keyword ignores the rules 
for weapons/armour/equipment with Keyword HEAVY, 
including not being limited to carrying only one HEAVY 
item (though other limitations apply as normal). In 
addition, it may use a single two-handed Melee weapon 
as a one-handed weapon. 


SULTANATE: This model is part of the Iron Sultanate 
faction. 


TOUGH: If a TOUGH model would be taken Out Of 
Action, it is knocked Down instead. After a TOUGH 
model has been knocked Down in this way once, it can 
be taken Out of Action as normal. 


14 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


T 


n this part of the book, we will take a 
detailed look at each warband and provide 
the information you need to recruit one. 


Choose Your Faction 


Each warband in Trench Crusade belongs to a faction 
fighting in the Great War. Use the faction lists that 
follow to recruit and equip your warband. These lists 
give you the necessary information about the troop types 
available, their weapons, armour and equipment options, 
as well as special rules specific to that faction. 


Note: Most warbands have Variant Lists which you can 
use instead of the main list. These are listed as part of 
the Warband List entry and they detail how the variant 
differs from the core list. 


Recruit Your Warband 


Once you have selected your faction (and possible 
Variant), you have 700 ducats to spend on your initial 
warband. Each model and their equipment (if you 
choose to buy any) costs a set amount of money. As you 
make your choices, subtract the money you have “spent” 
from your total until you have bought all you can. Any 
unspent ducats are put into the warband’s strongbox 
and can be used later or hoarded to buy something more 
expensive. 


Some items, weapons and armour cost Glory Points 
instead of ducats to acquire them. Glory Points are 
earned by performing valorous deeds in battle. Refer 
to the section on Glory for details. Generally warbands 
don’t have access to Glory Points when they are created, 
so these purchases usually happen later on in the 
campaign. 


Each warband list details what troops are available to 
you and in what numbers. Most lists include a model 
they must have when the warband is created, usually 
representing its commanding officer. Otherwise you 


are allowed to purchase as many or as few warriors as 
you wish. We recommend that the weapons, armour 
and equipment you choose for your warriors should be 
represented on the models themselves to make it easier 
for you and your opponents to play the game. 


Keywords 


Some troop types, weapons and pieces of equipment 
have Keywords that give them special abilities, or denote 
them to be part of a group of models where certain rules 
apply to all models with the same Keyword. See the 
section on Keywords for details. 


Limitations 
Some armaments are more limited in supply. They may 
have the following Keywords that limit their availability. 
These limitations are shown in the warband lists as 
follows: 


; LIMIT (x): If the piece of equipment has a 
Keyword LIMIT, then your warband cannot have 
more than the set number of this type of weapon, 
armour or equipment. For example, if a Weapon 
has Keyword LIMIT (2), then your warband can 
purchase a maximum of two such weapons. If you 
lose any of these weapons during the campaign, you 
can buy replacements with available funds up to a 
maximum of two. 


; ELITE only: Some weapons, armour or 
equipment are only usable by troops with the 
ELITE Keyword. You cannot give them to troops 
without the ELITE Keyword even if you acquire 
extras during a campaign. 


Equipment 


Unless otherwise stated in the rules, each warrior may 
carry the following: 


; One two-handed ranged weapon OR 
; Up to two one-handed ranged weapons. 


Starting a Warband 


I 


When it comes to making sure the 


models in your game match their 


actual equipment and weapons, 


we recommend the following 


maxim: 


“Be strict with yourself but 


lenient with others.” 


15 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


In addition, they may carry: 


; One two-handed melee weapon OR 
; Up to two single-handed melee weapons. 


You may buy additional equipment between battles 
or acquire new weapons during a campaign, and freely 
change the equipment, weapons and armour of your 
fighters unless otherwise noted in their warband list 
entry. You must still obey the limitations as explained in 
the rules when it comes to changing the armaments of 
your models. 


Some models come equipped with set weapons and 
armour when purchased, whilst some models may not 
change their loadout at all. All these cases are clearly 
indicated in the rules. 


Allies 


During the campaign you will have a chance to obtain 
Glory Points which can be used to purchase powerful 
troops and famous warriors known as Allies. These 
will add both numbers and specialist abilities to your 
warband. They cannot be purchased with ducats – the 
only way to attract their services is to perform glorious 
deeds on the battlefield! 


Allies fight alongside your warband, but they do not 
benefit or suffer from any special rules or restrictions 
that your warband might have. For example, a 
mercenary’s equipment never counts toward the LIMIT 
for any of the items that they have. Additionally, a Sin 
Eater (a mercenary available to the Heretic Legions) 
would not be affected by the Trench Ghost’s unique 
rules such as Slow and Undead Fortitude. If a rule is 
capable of affecting Allies, it will explicitly state so. 


Roster 


You’ll need a warband roster sheet to record the details 
of your warband. Blank roster sheets can be found 
printed at the back of this book and we offer a free 
digital version of the roster sheet at trenchcrusade.com. 


When you choose a warband, take a warband roster 
sheet and write down the details of each trooper in 
the appropriate place. It is a good idea to work out the 
warband on a piece of scrap paper first, as you will have 
to juggle the weapons and fighters to get as close to the 
maximum permitted value of the warband as possible. 
If you have any cash left after choosing your warband 
write this down in the space marked Strongbox. You will 
need to give your warband a name as well as name all 
your Elites and all your common troopers. It’s up to you 


15 


to invent suitable names, though you’ll find plenty of 
inspiration throughout this book. 


Ready for Battle 


Your warband is now ready. The Great War awaits! 


Characteristics Profile 


The characteristics of each model are described in 
their profile. You will find profiles for all models in the 
appropriate faction list. The information found on the 
profiles is described here. 


Model name 
The name of the model is recorded first in any profile. 


Movement 
The distance in inches which the model may move on 
the battlefield each time it is activated. 


Ranged 
This number indicates how many +/- DICE the model 
adds to its attack roll when using any ranged weapons. 
The higher the number, the more skilled a warrior is 
when using ranged weapons. 


Melee 
This number indicates how many +/- DICE the model 
adds to its attack roll when making a melee attack. The 
higher the number, the more skilled a model is. 


Armour 
Indicates how well-armoured the model is. This number 
is subtracted from the roll on the Injury Chart when the 
model is wounded. 


Base 
Indicates the size of the base the model is mounted on. 


Equipment 
This entry lists the equipment, weapons and armour the 
model is carrying, as well as what options for acquiring 
additional gear it may have. 


Abilities 
If the model has any unique special abilities not covered 
by the standard rules, they will be described here. 


Keywords 
Any Keywords the model has will be listed here. These 
include troop types as well as the most common abilities 
shared between multiple troop types, each identified by 
the identical Keyword. The Keywords section explains 
the rules for each of them. 


16 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Heretic Legion 


shroud of darkness blankets the world. 
Smoke and brimstone spews from the 
yawning gates of Inferno, enveloping the 
lands where people have abandoned God 
and openly wage war against His Creation. 
It is a grim reality that a full third of humanity has bent 
its knee before the idols of Hell. The main military force 
of Satan on Earth is the Heretic Legions, raised from 
amongst these citizens of the damned. 
Under special absolution from the Cardinal Protector, 
many spies have been dispatched into Hell’s domains 
over the years. Most are never seen again, though the 
eternally screaming heads of some have been returned to 
New Antioch, branded with bleeding runes that mock 
the Holy Trinity. 
Yet some do make it back to the light, whispering of 
the horrors they have witnessed: of firstborn cast into 
the mouths of the burning statues of Baal and human 
flesh sold by the pound in dreadful markets. They speak 
of the great idols of the Golden Calf and rapturous 
men and women who prostrate themselves before them, 
carving layers of their own flesh in ecstatic offering. 
Inverted pyramids and towers plunge into the depths of 
these cities, built of iron and black stone. Within these 
pits stand sacrificial altars where weeping captives are 
slowly sliced to death over agonising days and weeks 
with wicked knives made of infernal basalt. Cathedrals 
to the Princes of Hell hang from great arches of volcanic 
stone, while condemned are crucified on hundreds of 
upside-down crosses. 
Accounts speak of sprawling factories made of 
mutilated flesh and metal, their forges yielding endless 
munitions for the ongoing war. Guided by the teachings 
of Tartarus’ smiths, alchemists toil over colossal weapons 
and armoured behemoths, wielding the forbidden 
secrets of their patrons’ metallurgy to forge instruments 
of death and suffering beyond the grasp of any human 
engineer. These are once-proud cities of Earth, where 
churches have been toppled and entire populations are 
now dedicated towards bringing down the very Throne 
of Heaven. 


“We are no longer supplicating 


weaklings trembling before an 


unmerciful God. We say: Blessed 


are the mighty-minded, for they 


shall ride the whirlwinds.” 


- Ramman, Anointed of the XXI 


Heretic Legion ‘Widowmakers’ 


Amongst the forsaken citizens that endure within the 
earthly domains of Hell, the greatest status is afforded 
to the soldiers fighting in the Great War. But joining the 
army of damnation is no easy task. Those who wish to 
win a place amongst the Heretic Legions must make an 
unholy pilgrimage to the burning bronze gates of Hell. 
Even from leagues away, the infernal heat emanating 
from this great edifice sears both flesh and spirit until the 
pain becomes unbearable. In the Valley of Tears the great 
road that leads to the gate, paved as it is with wailing 
souls and lamentations, is littered with endless mounds 
of charred bodies. Many are still half-alive, writhing 
in agony, trapped in a grotesque twilight between life 
and death, their wickedness deemed insufficient. These 
discarded souls are doomed to writhe in agony until the 
Day of Judgement. 
Those who make it within sight of Hell’s Maw are 
considered worthy and are initiated into the Legions, 
taking unbreakable vows that chain them into darkness 
for all eternity, their bodies branded with the mark of 
the Devil Lord that has claimed them. Armouries of Hell 
then equip them for battle and Heretic Priests beckon 
forth new supplicants as dictated by the whispers of their 
patron arch-devils. Thus a new Heretic Legionnaire is 
born. They hail Archdevils as their masters and are thus 
damned for all eternity. 
Yet there are some who push further on: to the 
very Gate itself and beyond. Their very flesh ignites, 
never to recover, but those with the blackest souls can 
enter Inferno itself. Amongst those the Anointed are 
especially revered amongst the Legions. They are the 
paragons of unhinged brutality – men and women of 
colossal vigour and unyielding devotion. Having tread 
the accursed path to the shores of the Lake of Eternal 
Flame, where the damned wither and contort in ceaseless 
torment, the Anointed emerge forever scarred by the 
embrace of abyssal fires. The blackened and burnt flesh 
of the Anointed will never heal, but in exchange they 
are granted the right to wear Heavy Gehenna armoured 
suits and they gain strength to wield weapons that a 
normal man could barely lift. It is said that glancing into 


A 


17 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


their eyes one can see the reflection of the very flames of 
Hell, forever etched in their vision. 
Yet some who witness go even further in their 
depraved devotion. Suicide is a mortal sin and one 
eagerly embraced by many. Most cry out for devils to 
notice their final sacrifice in vain, as the Infernal nobles 
are capricious and delight in betraying their own as 
much as their enemies. But those with truly wicked 
and depraved souls are resurrected in contempt of the 
Redeemer, coming back as Choristers, horrific mockeries 
of Creation whose severed heads sing unholy hymns 
praising the Devil, their voices causing the ears of their 
enemies to bleed. 
Though the vast bulk of the Heretic Legions are made 
of mortal humans, Hell often sends their own abhorrent 
progeny to reinforce their mortal foot soldiers: 
nightmarish War Beasts made of captured and possessed 
creatures and dreaded Artillery Witches who act as 
mobile artillery supporting lighting assaults. Thus, in 
this accursed theatre of war, mortals and abominations 
march hand in withering hand, bound by the suffering 
ties of damnation. The wails of tortured beasts meld 
with the shrieks of damned souls, while the skies rain 
down fiery retribution upon all who dare to oppose the 
Heretics’ ceaseless crusade for a demented parity with 
their Creator. 


Warband Creation 


You have 700 ducats to recruit your initial Force in the 
campaign. For one-off battles, we suggest a typical force 
of 900 ducats and 8 Glory Points. 


Heretic Legion Armoury 


Heretic Legion troops can be equipped with the 
following weapons, armour and equipment. All 
exceptions are clearly listed here on the entries for each 
warrior or in the list below. If any item is marked as 
LIMIT, you can only have as many of these weapons 
at any point during the campaign as indicated in the 
brackets. Armaments marked as ELITE only are limited 
to the models with that Keyword. 


Ranged Weapons 
Bolt Action Rifle 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Semi-automatic Rifle 
15 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Automatic Rifle 
3 Glory Points (LIMIT: 2, Bayonet Lug) 
Pistol 
6 ducats 
Silenced Pistol 
15 ducats (ELITE Only) 
Grenades 
7 ducats 
Gas Grenades 
10 ducats 
Incendiary Grenades 
15 ducats 
Submachine gun 
2 Glory Points (Bayonet Lug, Shield Combo) 
Shotgun 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug, Shield Combo) 
Automatic Shotgun 
15 ducats (Bayonet Lug, Shield Combo) 
Grenade Launcher 
30 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Machine Gun 
50 ducats (LIMIT: 1) 
Flamethrower 
30 ducats (LIMIT: 3) 
Heavy Flamethrower 
55 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Anti-Materiel Rifle 
3 Glory Points (LIMIT: 1) 


Melee Weapons 
Trench Knife 
1 ducats 
Bayonet 
2 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Trench Club 
3 ducats 
Sword/Axe 
4 ducats 
Polearm 
7 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Great Hammer/Maul 
10 ducats 
Great Sword/Axe 
12 ducats 
Sacrificial Blade 
23 ducats (LIMIT: 2, 
ELITE Only) 
Hellblade 
1 Glory Point (LIMIT: 2) 
Tartarus Claws 
15 ducats (Death Commando Only) 
Blasphemous Staff 
2 Glory Points, (ELITE Only) 


Armour 
Standard Armour 
15 ducats 
Reinforced Armour 
40 ducats (ELITE & Anointed only) 
Trench Shield 
15 ducats 


Equipment 
Combat Helmet 
5 ducats (Headgear) 
Gas Mask 
5 ducats 
Unholy Trinket 
15 ducats (CONSUMABLE) 
Unholy Relic 
30 ducats 
Incendiary Ammunition 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1, CONSUMABLE) 
Shovel 
5 ducats 
Infernal Brand Mark 
5 ducats 
Troop Flag 
1 Glory Point (LIMIT: 1) 
Musical Instrument 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1) 
Mountaineer Kit 
3 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Hellbound Soul Contract 
5 ducats (LIMIT: 3, Heretic Troopers 
and Legionnaires only) 


18 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Heretic Special Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Heretic Warband. 


Sacrificial Knife 
Terrifying blades blessed by the hand of a greater devil, these knives are used in Heretic rituals to sacrifice captives to the 
dark powers of Hell. They simply need to touch their opponents to cause indescribable pain and even the slightest wound 
often proves fatal. They are risky even to their wielders, as the merest scratch wounds friend and a foe alike. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Sacrificial Knife 
1-handed 
Melee 
+2D to Injuries 
RISKY 


Rules: The Sacrificial Knife adds +2 DICE to all rolls on the Injury Chart. 


Blasphemous Staff 
Made in mockery of the rod carried by the Prophet Aaron, the slightest touch from this evil staff causes unimaginable 
agony. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Blasphemous Staff 
1-handed 
Melee 
- 
FIRE, CRITICAL 


Hellblade 
Crafted from iron ore from the mines of Dis, this weapon burns with the unquenchable fires of Hell. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Hellblade 
2-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Injuries 
FIRE 


Rules: The Hellblade has +1 DICE when rolling for injuries. It also has the Keyword FIRE, so it causes an 
additional +1 BLOOD MARKER on enemies it hits. 


Tartarus Claws 
Made from the severed hands of Malebranche, Tartarus Claws are granted by Arch-Devils only to those whose hearts are 
blackened with the sin of wrath. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Tartarus Claws 
2-handed 
Melee 
- 
CUMBERSOME 


Rules: Tartarus Claws always come as a pair and do not allow the use of any other melee weapons or shield. You 
can make two Attack ACTIONS with the Claws without the usual -1 DICE for the second attack. If the opponent 
is taken Down or Out of Action with either of the Claws you may immediately move the model up to 6” in any 
direction. If the move takes you into contact with another enemy model, this counts as a charge and you can make a 
second Melee Attack ACTION with both claws. You can only do this follow-up move once per Activation. 


19 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


20 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Heretic Elites 


1 Heretic Priest 
(Cost: 80 Ducats) 


Your Warband must include a Heretic Priest when it is created. 


The Leader of a Heretic warband. These fallen priests perform all kinds of unholy magics, 
summoning petrifying demons and creatures using their Goetic spells. Often pledged to 
a demon lord in hell, such as Pazuzu or Guison, the Profane Gospels they recite terrify 
church forces, causing ears to bleed and eyeballs to burst in their sockets. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Heretic Priest 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Heretic Priest can be equipped with any weapon, armour or equipment from the 
Heretic Legion Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Puppet Master: Select a target model, friend or foe (including the Priest), 
within 12”. As a RISKY ACTION you can move the model D6” in any one 
direction, including forcing it to jump/fall down or enter into melee combat with 
any enemy model (as if it had Charged), or leave Combat (as if it had Retreated, 
including granting any enemies within range free attacks). 
; Tough: Demonic vitality makes the Heretic Priests very difficult to slay. They 
are subject to the rules for TOUGH creatures. 


Keywords 
HERETIC, ELITE, TOUGH 


0-1 Heretic Death Commando 
(Cost: 90 Ducats) 


Silent Killers equipped with stealth generators that hide them from the eyes of God. These 
terrifying infiltrators have been known to kill entire enemy squads alone. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Death Commando 6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Death Commando can be equipped with any melee weapon, armour or equipment 
from the Heretic Legion Armoury. The only ranged weapons they can buy are silenced 
pistols, a Tormentor Chain and/or Gas Grenades. 


Abilities 


; Infiltrator: The Death Commando can be placed anywhere on the table out of 
line of sight of any enemies, but at least 8” away from the closest enemy. Deployed 
after all other models without the Keyword INFILTRATOR. 
; Stealth Generator: Ranged attacks against a Death Commando suffer -1 DICE 
to all the attack rolls. 
; Hide: As a RISKY ACTION with +1 DICE the Commando can hide if any 
piece of scenery the model is touching can block line of sight in any direction, even 
partially, regardless of whether an enemy currently has a clear LOS. If successful, 
enemies cannot target the Commando with ranged attacks or Charges. Weapons 
with the Keyword BLAST affect the Commando as normal if it is in the radius of the 


21 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


weapon. This effect ends if the Commando moves from its exact position in any way, 
it makes a Ranged Attack or an enemy model comes within 1.5” of it. 


Keywords 
HERETIC, ELITE, INFILTRATOR 


0-1 Heretic Chorister 
(Cost: 65 Ducats) 


Suicide is a Mortal Sin, and sacrificing yourself to the glory of Hell is a yet greater affront 
to God. Some Heretics born with a gift of sonorous voice but little prospects of rising 
through the ranks but possessing a determination to excel may pursue the dark path of 
becoming a Chorister. 


Such supplicants go to one of the black altars of Heretic abodes at the bottom of the deep 
inverted pyramid temples dedicated to the greatest of Arch-devils. There they are dressed 
in the robes of dark devotion, lie on the altar and mutilate themselves to death by 
carving unholy runes into their flesh. The more wounds they can suffer before perishing, 
the more pleasing it is said their offering is. The most devout slice their own throats, 
trying to cut as deep as they can before their miserable life leaves them. 


Most such wretches go to their doom in the Lake of Fire, but some are reborn as 
Choristers after nine days. Their corpses lurch back to their feet, and finish their grisly 
beheading, and lift their severed heads that begin to sing hymns they have learned in the 
Inferno. From their self-inflicted wounds spurts cold blood that forms diabolic symbols 
and changes to match the words of their unholy chorale. They head towards the front 
lines driven by a call no living can hear and join the Heretic warband of their choosing. 


As their severed heads sing their agonising hymns, the minds of their enemies are filled 
with visions from the Pits of Hell, weakening both the resolve and strength of those 
unfortunate enough to hear the dire song of a Chorister. Their hymns are often the first 
thing a fresh recruit experiences on the battlefield, as their unholy voice rolls across the 
trenches, proclaiming a never-ending prophecy of the final victory of Hell over Heaven. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Chorister 
6”/Infantry -2 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Chorister can be equipped with any weapon, armour or equipment from the 
Heretic Legion Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Unholy Hymns: All enemy models within 8” of the Chorister suffer an 
additional -1 DICE for all ACTIONS they attempt. 
; Unholy Horror: The Chorister causes FEAR. 


Keywords 
HERETIC, ELITE, FEAR 


22 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Legionnaires of Hell 


Heretic Trooper 
(Cost: 30 Ducats) 


These soldiers make up the bulk of the Heretic forces. They have witnessed the Gate of Hell 
and survived, damning them for all eternity. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Heretic trooper 
6”/Infantry 0 
0 
0 
25mm 
Legionnaire 
6”/Infantry +1D OR 
+1D 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Heretic Troopers can be equipped with any weapon, armour or equipment from the 
Heretic Legion armoury. You can upgrade up to half (rounding down) of your Heretic 
Troopers into Heretic Legionnaires at the cost of +10 ducats each. You can select 
to upgrade either the Ranged or Melee characteristic of all your Legionnaires by +1 
DICE. All Legionnaires must have the same bonus. 


Abilities 
N/A 


Keywords 
HERETIC 


0-5 Anointed Heavy Infantry 
(Cost: 95 Ducats) 


Heavily armed and armoured assault troops. Their skin is burned and blistering from their 
ordained pilgrimages to Hell and back. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Anointed 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+1 Dice 
-2 
32mm 


Equipment 
Anointed are always equipped with a suit of Reinforced Armour and Infernal brand 
mark which are included in the cost. This armour can never be removed. Otherwise 
they can be equipped with any weapon, armour or equipment from the Heretic Legion 
Armoury and may purchase a Trench Shield. 


Abilities 


; Strong: The Heretic Heavy Infantry ignores the effect of the Keyword HEAVY 
on any weapon they wield. 


Keywords 
HERETIC, STRONG 


23 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 War Wolf Assault Beast 
(Cost: 140 Ducats) 


This abomination charges through miles of barbed wire to clear a path for the heretic 
infantry. Its specially formed head is designed to cut clean through it. War Wolves wear 
unique armour forged in the factories of hell, as seen by the maker’s marks stamped upon it. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
War Wolf 
8”/Infantry N/A 
+2 Dice 
-3 
50mm 


Equipment 
You cannot buy additional equipment, weapons or armour for War Wolves. Each 
War Wolf is encased in a nigh impregnable suit of Tartarus Armour that is reflected 
in its profile above. Additionally, each War Wolf has a set of Shredding Claws and a 
vicious Chainsaw Mouth. These pieces of equipment are built into the integrity of 
its construction and cannot be removed or lost in any way. The weapons are detailed 
below. The War Wolf may make one attack ACTION with each of these weapons in 
Melee Combat and may make no other attacks during its Activation (so it can make 
two attacks per Activation). 


; Chainmaw: The War Wolf treats its Chainsaw Mouth as a melee weapon with 
the Keyword RISKY that grants a +1 DICE bonus to hit (for total of +3D). 
Additionally, the attack ignores any armour worn by the target and has a +1 DICE 
bonus to injure. The Chainsaw Mouth does not take any hands to wield. 
; Shredding Claws: The War Wolf treats its Shredding Claws as a two-handed 
melee weapon with the Keywords RISKY and CUMBERSOME. The Shredding 
Claws have a +1 DICE bonus to injure. Because the Shredding Claws are wielded 
alongside the Chainsaw Mouth, they are treated as an Off-Hand Weapon and 
suffer penalties accordingly. 


Abilities 


; Tough: War Wolves are huge 
creatures with unnatural vitality 
and are subject to the rules for 
TOUGH creatures. 
; Loping Dash: A War Wolf 
may take its Dash ACTION with 
+2 DICE. The War Wolf ignores 
movement penalties caused by 
Difficult Terrain. 
; Terrifying: A War Wolf is 
a blasphemous creation of 
Hell and causes FEAR. 


Keywords 
HERETIC, FEAR, 
TOUGH, ARTIFICIAL 


24 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Artillery Witches 
(Cost: 90 Ducats) 


(0-2 for forces of 1000+ ducats) 


Artillery Witches stalk the battlefields, hurling ordnance assembled in the death factories 
of Hell’s 3rd Circle. They are completely mute and no one has ever seen their faces. Some 
question if they are even living, and there are tales that they too were manufactured in 
Hell. They can pull an infinite number of Infernal Bombs from a portal to Hell that they 
manifest at will. Their infernal explosives appear in their hand from a gate of midnight 
blackness. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Artillery Witch 
6”/Infantry 0 Dice 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
An Artillery Witch is always equipped with an endless supply of Infernal Bombs (see 
below) and can carry no other ranged weapons. Otherwise, she can be equipped with 
any melee weapon, armour or equipment from the Heretic Legion Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Infernal Bomb: This wicked infernal weapon is treated as a one-handed 
Ranged weapon with the Keyword BLAST 3”. Specify a 1x1mm point on the 
battlefield within 36” that the Witch can see and that you want to target. Next, 
make a Ranged Attack ACTION. If the roll fails (i.e. you roll 6 or less with the two 
lowest Dice), the bomb lands 1” away from its intended location, multiplied by the 
number representing the degree of failure (for example, if you rolled 5, the bomb 
lands 2” away, as 7-5=2). The direction is decided by your opponent. Roll on the 
Injury Chart for each model within the BLAST radius. 


If the bomb lands exactly on top of any model, roll with 3D6 on the Injury Chart 
and add the dice together! Other models hit by the bomb roll on the Injury Chart 
as standard. Any model hit, but not taken Out of Action, by this attack is blown 
D3” directly away from the point of impact (roll for each model separately), 
stopping if they hit other models/buildings/objects. This attack has the Keyword 
SHRAPNEL and therefore causes an additional +1 BLOOD MARKER. Cover, range 
and higher position do not affect attacks by the Infernal Bomb. Roll injuries for 
models that would benefit from Cover from the perspective of the BLAST point 
with -1 DICE. The Activation of the Witch ends immediately after using the 
Infernal Bomb. 


; Artificial Life: Artillery Witches are not affected by FEAR. Additionally, 
attacks with the Keyword GAS suffer a -1 DICE penalty to injure the Witch and 
they do not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from the Keyword GAS. 


; Levitate: The Artillery Witch can Climb up without taking 
an ACTION and does not roll on the Injury Chart 
when falling. 


Keywords 
HERETIC, ARTIFICIAL 


“And the wretched supplicants, 
forsaken and deformed, crawled 
upon their bellies.” 
- Biologis Mutatis 13:5 


25 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Wretched 
(Cost: 25 Ducats) 


(Your warband may include any number of Wretched as long as they are outnumbered 
by models with the Keyword HERETIC.) 


Many unfortunate people fall into the hands of the Heretic warbands, either during 
one of their many raids or battles, or purchased from the slave markets within their own 
territories. Some are foolhardy adventurers who travel into the domains of the damned and 
are caught by their watchful patrols. 


Their lot is grim and terrible, as they are worked to death in the factories of the Sixty-Six 
Lords, butchered for meat or, worst of all, sold or offered to the agents of the Court of the 
Seven-headed Serpent to be used as raw power for Goetic Spells. 


Yet one path to freedom exists: they can volunteer to serve in the Legions as the lowest of 
low, the most disposable of penal troops. For the law of Hell is clear: those who rebel against 
God can gain their freedom if they are deemed to have performed sufficiently great deeds. 
Thus it is no wonder that many Heretic warbands drive swarms of the Wretched ahead of 
them to blunt and slow down the enemy assaults. 


Wretched are branded with cursed flesh-eating tattoos as a safeguard against escape and 
heavily drugged to degrade and dull their will, while still leaving their aggression intact. 
Heretic elites discard their lives carelessly, as the sacrifice of their life on the battlefield 
counts as a virtuous deed which will be rewarded by their Patrons. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Wretched 
6”/Infantry -1 Dice 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
The Wretched can be equipped with any melee weapon, armour or equipment from 
the Heretic Armoury List. None of their weapons, armour or equipment can cost more 
than 10 ducats each. Every Wretched must be equipped with at least one weapon. 


Abilities 


; Law of Hell: If a Wretch manages to take any enemy ELITE model Out of 
Action or performs a Glorious Deed, it gains its freedom and is immediately 
removed from the battle and from your warband permanently. It does not count 
as a casualty, but your warband’s total size for this battle is reduced by one for 
purposes of Morale. 


; Dark Blessing: If a Wretch is taken Out of Action in battle, one of 
your models with Keywords HERETIC and ELITE gains one BLESSING 
MARKER. 


; Chattel: Wretched can be sold at any time for their full ducat value between 
battles. Note that their weapons, armour and equipment still only fetch half price. 


Keywords 
- 


26 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: Heretic 
Naval Raiding Party 


The Heretic Fleet operates as a semi-autonomous 
entity under the command of its High Captain and 
other admirals. The Heretics have their own marine 
infantry that often operates in small bands, striking 
deep behind enemy lines and executing smash and grab 
missions. They are always on the lookout for captives, 
loot, information, supplies, rare artefacts and the simple 
opportunity to express their cruelty and brutality. They 
are picked from amongst the best soldiers of the Heretic 
Legions, and have access to equipment and weapons 
gained from past battles and terrible atrocities they have 
committed. 


Special rules 
The Heretic Naval Raiding Party has the following 
special rules: 


; Fast as Lightning: All Models have +1 DICE 
when taking their Dash ACTIONS. 
; Close Assault Weapons: The warband can buy 
Submachine Guns for 25 ducats per weapon. 
; Light Troops: The force may only include 0-1 
Annointed and 0-1 Artillery Witch. 
; Let Sleeping Dogs Lie: The warband may not 
include a War Wolf. 
; Unseen Advance: Up to three models 
without ELITE Keyword can be upgraded into 
INFILTRATORS at the cost of 10 ducats per Model. 


Warband Variant: 
Trench Ghosts 


Sometimes when Heretic troopers die upon a hallowed 
ground or in presence of an uncorrupted holy relic, 
they become trapped between planes of existence. 
Claimed by neither Heaven nor Hell, the Trench Ghosts 
become Undead, doomed to fight a war without an end, 
attacking both the Faithful and Heretic alike, hating all 
life, obeying commands that no living can hear. Their 
greed for worldly wealth and items of power remains 
undiminished, and their semi-corporeal bodies are 
exceedingly difficult to destroy. Their faces covered 
with gas masks they no longer have any use for. At close 
combat they whisper of the agony of their existence 
and the pain of their doom which will never give them 
rest, their broken bodies and shattered minds forced 
to endure the horrors of war for all eternity. Few can 
withstand such terror without breaking. 


Tales are told of many Trench Ghost Warbands that 
haunt No Man’s Land, but the most famous are the 
Ghosts of Tannenberg, shades of the Heretic force that 
won the battle of Tannenberg but after sacking the 
Church of St. Jacob passed into the shadow. 


Special rules 
The Trench Ghosts have the following special rules: 


; Horror: All models in the Warband cause FEAR. 
; Semi-corporeal: Any attacks against all models 
in the Trench Ghost warband roll injuries with -1 
DICE – the undead are hard to kill! 
; Spectral: All models in the warband ignore 
movement penalties caused by Difficult Terrain, 
though they cannot move through any objects/ 
terrain. Dangerous terrain affects them as normal. 
; Undead: All models in the Trench Ghost 
warband do not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS 
from attacks with the Keyword GAS. 
; Strength Beyond the Grave: The Heretic Priest 
of the warband has the Keyword STRONG. 
; Battlefield Looters: When this warband is 
created, select one item with LIMIT in the Heretic 
Legions Armoury. Its LIMIT is increased by one for 
your warband. 
; Lost Souls: Since only mortals who have souls 
become ghosts, this warband may not have any War 
Wolves or Artillery Witches, since they are artificial 
beings. In addition, no model in the warband may 
have a Hellbound Soul Contract or an Infernal 
Brand Mark. Any model that has one of these pieces 
of equipment in their base profile will not have it, 
although its price remains the same. 
; Slow: All models in Trench Ghost warband have 
-1 DICE in all their Dash ACTIONS. 


27 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: 
Knights of Avarice 


The warbands who follow the Prince of Greed call 
themselves the Knights of Avarice. Such heretics display 
their wealth extravagantly and prefer to carry the most 
expensive and hard-to-acquire weapons, armour and 
equipment, suffering none to join them who lacks 
the means to obtain their glittering panoply. They are 
festooned with chains of gold and the finest silk cloaks, 
their armour is gilded with gold and decorated with 
precious stones, and the handles of their great coin 
hammers are made of the rarest of wood. Yet despite 
the opulent wealth at display, their finery is tarnished 
by the blood and soot that spews from the Hellgate, 
and the delicate artistic filigree of their golden masks is 
both terrible and beautiful in equal measure. In combat 
they favour hammers and clubs that break the bones but 
leave the flesh and blood intact, as well as poison gas and 
highly accurate rifles. They scorn crude and destructive 
fire or explosive weapons that could damage any objects 
of value. 


After the Knights of Avarice have claimed victory in 
combat, they scour the battlefield or any settlement 
they’ve conquered like a swarm of locusts. Anything and 
everything of value is taken: metals from brass to bronze, 
silver to gold, art objects, precious stones, livestock, 
trade goods, rare tomes and scrolls… all are meticulously 
catalogued and carried away by slaves and demonic 
beasts of burden or great armoured cars that take the 
stolen loot to the underground treasure chambers 
which act as the temples of Mammon. Even the dead 
are stripped of their flesh with the detached skill of 
seasoned butchers, ready to be sold at market. Internal 
organs taken from fallen victims are carefully preserved 
in alchemical liquids to be sold to the scientists of the 
infernal laboratories. 


For the Heretics of the Path of Mammon hoarding 
riches is not mere acquisition of wealth – it is their 
religious compulsion. Ironically, they gain little 
pleasure from their vast wealth, as their greed makes 
them continuously desire ever greater riches. Thus 
their warbands forever roam No Man’s Land, looking 
for forgotten treasures or foes to dissect and turn into 
wealth. For the greed of Mammon will never be sated. 


Special rules 
The Knights of Avarice have the following special rules: 


; Worship Mammon: In a campaign, the patron 
of the warband will always be Mammon. Instead of 
the Puppet Master ability, the Heretic Priest of the 
Knights of Avarice may select the Price of Greed 
ability if they wish: 


The Price of Greed: Worldly wealth belonging to the 
target model of this curse starts crushing them under 
its weight. Choose any model the Priest sees within 
12” and take a RISKY ACTION. If successful, roll 
immediately on the Injury Chart for that model and 
add +1 DICE to the injury roll for each -1 Armour 
modifier the model has (for example if the model 
has a Trench Shield and standard armour, add +2 
DICE to the injury rolls). 


; Mammon’s Chosen: Knights of Avarice 
allow only the wealthiest and the best-equipped 
candidates to join their ranks. Your force may have 
no models that cost less than 80 ducats (including 
their equipment). 
; Corrupt Merchants: Many merchants, traders 
and moneylenders within the Faithful nations 
are followers of Mammon and secretly supply the 
Knights of Avarice with their wares. When creating 
the warband, select one weapon, suit of armour or 
other piece of equipment from the New Antioch 
Armoury and one such item from the Iron Sultanate 
Armoury. You can acquire this gear exactly as 
the warband they come from. Any of these items 
in question must not be already available to the 
Heretic Warband. All the same limitations of the 
original lists apply, so there is little point in taking an 
Assassin’s Dagger (for example) since it can be only 
used by Assassins. These two selected additions are 
available to your warband throughout the campaign. 
; Preserve the Loot: Knights of Avarice greatly 
dislike using weapons that could damage the amount 
of wealth that can be extracted from the fallen. No 
weapon with the Keyword FIRE or SHRAPNEL can 
be used by any model in this warband. In addition, 
the Artillery Witches of this warband use Gas 
Bombs: They have the Keyword GAS instead of 
SHRAPNEL and they ignore armour. Injuries caused 
by a direct hit are rolled with 2D6 and models 
within a 3” blast radius are rolled with -1 DICE. 
In a similar vein, their Grenade Launchers have the 
GAS keyword instead of the SHRAPNEL keyword, 
have a -1 D to injury rolls and ignore armour. 
; Infernal Rivalry: Mammon is a rival of Beruth, 
the great devil of wrath and murder, who is the 
Patron of Death Commandos. Knights of Avarice 
may include no Death Commandos. 
; Goetic Warlocks: Goetic Warlocks are creations 
of Mammon. This warband may include one for the 
price of 110 ducats. This Warlock is still a mercenary 
and obeys all of the rules associated with being a 
mercenary (such as having fixed equipment and not 
being able to be promoted to an ELITE throughout 
the course of a campaign). 
; Debtors to Mammon: Wretched of the warband 
are not tied by Mammon’s Chosen rule. 


28 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Special Weapons & Equipment 


Tarnished Armour 
45 ducats 
This suit of armour gilded with gleaming gold comes with a helmet often with a beautiful, cherub-like face warped or 
corrupted in some way, such as with inhuman eyes or with the whole face twisted upside-down. Despite its splendour the 
armour is always tarnished by blood, offal or other kind of corruption. Merely seeing it fills mortals with incredible greed 
and makes the wearer an immediate target of their wrath as they attempt to tear it from them. 


Rules: The suit counts as Reinforced Armour, a helmet and a gas mask. When an enemy declares a charge, they must 
charge the model wearing this armour if it is visible, not in cover and within 12” of the wearer. The charging model 
must be able to reach this model without climbing, leaping or crossing dangerous terrain. If the wearer of the armour 
is already in melee combat, this power has no effect. LIMIT:1 


Standard of Mammon 
25 ducats 
Battle Standards of Mammon are opulently decorated works of art, icons and banners done in mockery of the virtues 
of Charity and Temperance. Always made of the most expensive materials, each is a unique work of dark genius, often 
depicting saints performing vile sins or famous acts of Greed. It has the power to compel anyone to kneel before the Prince of 
Greed. 


Rules: Grants +1 DICE for all Morale tests as long as the model with the Flag is not Down or Out of Action. 
Requires one hand to use as if it was a weapon, both in ranged and melee combat. Any enemy entering melee combat 
with the model carrying this banner must make a successful ACTION or the model goes Down and cannot get up as 
long as they are in melee combat with the bearer of the standard. LIMIT:1 


Golden Calf Altar 
20 ducats 
This portable altar of Mammon creates illusions of immense wealth in any form its target covets above all. Overcome by 
supernatural greed, those affected by the Curse of Mammon are forced to swoop down, feebly trying to pick up the objects of 
their desire. 


Rules: The area within 3” of the altar is Difficult Terrain for all models in the opposing Warband. This affects even 
models that can Fly. The model carrying the altar may drop it at any point during their Activation. Once placed 
down, the Golden Calf Altar cannot be picked up again. It has a 25mm base. HEAVY, CONSUMABLE, LIMIT:3 


Coin Hammer 
20 ducats 
This double-handed hammer has the rune of mammon on its head. Its strikes leave a permanent, painful scar in the shape 
of Mammon’s rune which burns through even the thickest armour. Mammon loves marking the innocent with his Rune, 
as it sows mistrust amongst his enemies. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Coin hammer 
2-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Injuries 
HEAVY 


Rules: Roll all injuries with +1 DICE. When you inflict a BLOOD MARKER in melee with this weapon, the model 
wielding the hammer gains one BLESSING MARKER. LIMIT:2 


“You sold your false redeemer to 
us for a mere thirty pieces of silver. 
What makes you think your own 
price will be any higher?” 


- Bera the Plutocrat-lord of Mammon 


29 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


30 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Trench Pilgrims 


“A wicked and adulterous genera- 


tion seeketh after a sign; and no 


sign shall be given unto it, but the 


sign of the meta-christ.” 


- Divinations 12:9 
A 


s the war rages against the minions of 
Hell, strange visions torment the faithful 
across the globe. Men and women touched 
by Heaven are granted visions and 
Revelations are made by the messengers of 
God. Sisters of the Holy Orders are marked by Stigmata 
and take up the sword and the cross as instructed by 
angels. Those who have transgressed seek to atone for 
their sins by taking as many followers of the Devil with 
them to the afterlife. 
So they come, the mad and the maimed, the God- 
touched and the guilt-ridden – all gathering around 
Prophets and Prophetesses, forming Trench Pilgrim 
Processions. These disorganised groups arm themselves 
and follow the prophets of the Lord unto the front 
lines. They fight with unrivalled zeal, hurling themselves 
against the Heretics, arming themselves with anything 
they can get their hands on from the oldest muskets to 
scourges and Molotov Cocktails. 
Pilgrims are not officially sanctioned by the Holy 
See of New Antioch, but the Church still blesses the 
crusades of the faithful. Thus the Pilgrim Processions 
are a common sight on the battlefields, often 
crossing No Man’s Land in suicidal assaults upon the 
Heretics, directed by the visions of their Prophets and 
Prophetesses who lead them, urged on by the whips of 
Castigators who are charged with instilling the Fear of 
God in their troops. 
The bulk of the Pilgrims are men and women with 
little military training, but when they don the Iron 
Capirote of a Trench Pilgrim, they can face even a 
demon from the deepest Bolgias of Hell unflinchingly. 
Nor is death necessarily an end to their mission: 
sometimes the Seventh Meta-Christ will deem a 
fallen pilgrim worthy and bring them back as Martyr- 
Penitents: warriors half-way between Heaven and Earth, 
able to fight once more and feel no pain from bullet or 
bayonet thrust. 
Rarer and more dangerous are the Stigmatic Nuns, 
Holy Sisters who manifest wounds to match those of the 
Third Meta-Christ whom they venerate. They excel in 


close quarter combat, for each bleeding wound that they 
suffer makes them stronger, not weaker, as their devotion 
to suffering as their Lord once did gives them strength 
and endurance not found in common mortals. Armed 
with swords and pistols, they cross No Man’s Land 
heedless of any danger, praying to sustain wounds for the 
Redeemer which in turn will transform them into the 
very Vengeance of the Lord. 
In front of the Trench Pilgrims are driven the 
Ecclesiastic Prisoners – either captured enemies of the 
True Faith or volunteer sinners. Each is strapped with a 
high explosive which is detonated once they reach enemy 
lines. They dash across the killing grounds, hoping to 
somehow survive the blast and escape, or take as many 
followers of Lucifer with them as they can, depending on 
their convictions. 
The most puissant of Pilgrim Processions will be 
accompanied by a Shrine Anchorite, a metal behemoth 
some twelve feet tall, a living altar of war almost 
completely immune to any damage. The interior of the 
Anchorite is covered in spikes and barbed hooks so that 
the monk pilot is in a constant state of torment, rejoicing 
in their pain so they can suffer as their Lord once did. 
In combat they wield Adamantine Catherine Wheels of 
massive proportions which they use to crush sinners and 
heretics into a pulp, stringing them upon the wheel as a 
warning to others. 
There are a bewildering number and variety of Trench 
Pilgrim Processions: The Path of Pious Revenge swears 
in the name of St. Olga and uses flamethrowers, burning 
grenades and incendiary ammunition to assail the 
Heretics. The Pilgrims of the Iron Path follow St. Rita 
of Cascia and go to battle with hammers, mauls, maces 
and cudgels, and hammer nails into their heads in the 
memory of the saint they venerate. The Theban Legion 
of Rome carries the heads of the heretics upon their 
standards in the memory of their patron, St. Marice. 
They fight with swords and other blades, competing with 
each other for the number of heretic heads they amass. 
Trench Pilgrims of the Procession of the Sacred 
Affliction are known for their zeal in close quarter 


31 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


combat, their armour decorated with icons and shields 
adorned with the depictions of the Saints, which despite 
appearances can withstand machine gun bullets. The 
millstones they carry upon their backs are used to tie 
about the necks of sinners before drowning them in the 
mud and blood of No Man’s Land. 


Warband Creation 


You have 700 ducats to recruit your initial Force in the 
campaign. For one-off battles, we suggest a typical force 
of 900 ducats and 8 Glory Points. 


Trench Pilgrim Armoury 


Trench Pilgrims can be equipped with the following 
weapons, armour and equipment. All exceptions are 
clearly listed here on the entries for each warrior. 


Ranged Weapons 
Bolt Action Rifle 
10 ducats (Bayonet 
Lug) 
Semi-automatic Rifle 
15 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Pistol 
6 ducats 
Automatic Pistol 
20 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Molotov Cocktail 
5 ducats 
Incendiary Grenades 
15 ducats 
Submachine gun 
2 Glory Points 
(Bayonet Lug, Shield 
Combo) 
Musket 
5 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Shotgun 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug, 
Shield Combo) 
Flamethrower 
30 ducats 
Machine Gun 
2 Glory Points 
Sniper Rifle 
2 Glory Points 
Warcross 
5 ducats 
Punt Gun 
20 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 


Melee Weapons 
Trench Knife 
1 ducat 
Bayonet 
2 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Trench Club 
3 ducats 
Sword/Axe 
4 ducats 
Flail/Scourge 
5 ducats 
Polearm 
10 ducats (Shield 
Combo) 
Great Hammer/Maul 
10 ducats 
Great Sword/Axe 
12 ducats 
Anti-Tank Hammer 
35 ducats (ELITE only, 
LIMIT: 3) 
Misericordia 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1) 


Armour 
Standard Armour 
15 ducats 
Reinforced Armour 
40 ducats (ELITE only) 
Trench Shield 
15 ducats 
Holy Icon Shield 
2 Glory Points (ELITE only) 


Equipment 
Iron Capirote 
7 ducats (Headgear) 
Gas Mask 
5 ducats 
Blessed Icon 
15 ducats (CONSUMABLE) 
Holy Relic 
2 Glory Points (ELITE only) 
Troop Flag 
1 Glory Point (LIMIT: 1) 
Medi-Kit 
5 ducats 
Field Shrine 
2 Glory Points 
Musician’s instrument 
15 Ducats (LIMIT: 1, Non-ELITE only) 
Incendiary Ammunition 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1, CONSUMABLE) 
Martyrdom Pills 
20 ducats (CONSUMABLE, LIMIT: 3) 
Mountaineering Kit 
3 ducats (LIMIT: 1) 


32 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Trench Pilgrims Special Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Trench Pilgrim warband. 


Iron Capirote 
A conical helmet reminiscent of the headgear of the penitents. Blessed by the Church and often containing a fragment of a 
relic, Iron Capirotes shield their wearers from the psychological horror of war, enabling them to face creatures from the pits of 
Hell unflinchingly. 


Rules: Negates the additional BLOOD MARKERS from weapons with Keyword SHRAPNEL. Makes the model immune 
to the effects of FEAR. 


Molotov Cocktail 
Developed on the desperate Finnish battle frontier against the Ice Demons, this improvised weapon consists of a glass bottle 
containing a flammable substance such as gasoline, alcohol or a napalm-like mixture plus a source of ignition. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Molotov 
GRENADE 
6” 
-1D to Injury 
FIRE, ASSAULT 


Rules: -1 DICE on injury rolls. Molotov Cocktails ignore all penalties for terrain/cover, as well as ignoring all armour 
on a Critical Attack roll. 


War Cross 
A War Cross (also known as a wurfkreuz in the Holy Roman Empire) is a four-pronged throwing weapon in the shape of a 
cross. It is engraved with prayers and psalms that guide it on an unerring path. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
War Cross 
- 
8” 
No long-range penalty 
ASSAULT 


Rules: Does not count as one of the Ranged weapons carried by the model. Cannot be carried with Grenades. Ignores 
penalties for long range. A model with the weapon will not run out of them. 


Punt Gun 
A Punt Gun is an enormous shotgun loaded with up to 25 ounces of shot. It can be loaded with a risky amount of powder 
and square shot which causes widespread damage and destruction. It is a very popular weapon among Trench Pilgrims who 
lack access to conventional heavy weapons. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Punt Gun 
2-handed 
18” 
+1D to hit and to injure 
HEAVY, SHRAPNEL 


Rules: Owing to its high accuracy and lethal shot, a punt pun adds +1 DICE to all rolls to hit and to injury rolls. 
Before a model shoots with the punt gun, you can overcharge it with a shot, giving the weapon BLAST 3” radius. If 
you do this, the shooting ACTION with the Punt Gun always ends the shooter’s Activation and causes one BLOOD 
MARKER on the shooter. A model cannot make a ranged attack with the punt gun unless it is either STRONG or 
another friendly model is in base contact with it. 


Anti-tank Hammer 
A polearm with a directional explosive mounted on its head. It is exceedingly good at taking out armoured targets but puts 
its user in grave danger. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Anti-Tank Hammer 2-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Injuries 
RISKY, CRITICAL 


Rules: Ignores armour modifiers and rolls injuries with +1 DICE. If it hits the enemy, the wielder suffers +1 BLOOD 
MARKER as well. 


33 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


34 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Elites: God’s Chosen 


1 War Prophet 
(Cost: 80 Ducats) 


Your warband must include a War Prophet when it is created. 


A charismatic leader and powerful fighter of the Pilgrim group. They are driven by visions of 
Armageddon, and their preaching and prophecies drive the pilgrimage from one battlefield to 
the next, as they seek to thwart the forces of Satan and find martyrdom in combat. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
War Prophet 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The War Prophet can be equipped with any weapons, armour or equipment from the 
Trench Pilgrims Equipment List. 


Abilities 


; Loudspeakers: The War Prophet blares out holy sermons and dire prophecies 
at 100 decibels to inspire the faithful. The Prophet can take a RISKY ACTION 
with +2 DICE once during each Activation. If the action is successful, all friendly 
models within 8” of the Prophet (including the Prophet) that are not engaged in 
melee can immediately move up to 3” towards any enemy model they can see by 
the optimal path that reduces the distance between the moving model and the 
enemy. This move allows them to enter combat as if they charged the enemy and 
are considered to have done so until the end of the turn. 
; Memento Mori: The War Prophet is touched by a higher power and the 
revealed truth allows them a degree of protection against premature death. Once 
per battle, when the War Prophet is taken Out of Action for any reason, ignore the 
result as if nothing had happened. 
; Laying on Hands: With a successful ACTION, you may remove D3 BLOOD 
MARKERs from any friendly model within 6” (including the Prophet). 


Keywords 
ELITE, PILGRIM 


0-1 Castigator 
(Cost: 50 Ducats) 


Tasked with instilling the Fear of God in the troops, this orthodoxy officer keeps the soldiers 
on the path of righteousness and punishes those who transgress. They are protected by their 
unwavering faith as well as by the saints they revere. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Castigator 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Castigator can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the 
Trench Pilgrims Equipment List. 


Abilities 


; Enforced Orthodoxy: At any point during its Activation, a Castigator may 
take a RISKY ACTION with +1 DICE. If successful, all friendly models that are 
Down and within 8” of the Castigator may immediately stand up at no penalty or 
cost. 


35 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


; Whip of God: Unlike other models, a Castigator is allowed to attack friendly 
models with melee attacks within 1”. They can do this without declaring a charge. 
Each time the Castigator takes a friendly model Out of Action with a melee attack, 
set a die aside in a pool as the act of piety inspires the troops. The next time your 
warband makes a Morale roll, add an amount of +DICE to that roll equal to the 
amount of dice in the pool and empty it. 
; Zealot Strength: The Castigator may have the Keyword STRONG at the cost of 
+5 ducats. 


Keywords 
PILGRIM, ELITE 


0-1 Communicant 
(Cost: 100 Ducats) 


Communicants are devotees who consumed the flesh and blood of a Meta-Christ. 
Strengthened by the divine essence, they grow to enormous size and wounds they suffer 
close themselves miraculously. They see clearer blind, so blessed crosses are nailed through 
their eyes. 


On the battlefield they act as line-breakers and bodyguards for Prophets and Castigators, 
heedlessly walking through enemy fire and mauling their enemies with enormous weapons 
that a normal man can barely even lift. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Communicant 
6”/Infantry -3 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
40mm 


Equipment 
The Communicant can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from 
the Trench Pilgrim Equipment List. They always carry a Communicant Cross (see 
below). 


; The Communicant Cross: A sacred cross is nailed on the face of the 
Communicant. This counts as an Iron Capirote, 
Combat Helmet and a Gas Mask. 


Abilities 


; Strong: A Communicant ignores the 
penalties of weapons with the Keyword HEAVY 
; Tough: Communicants are subject to the rules 
for TOUGH Creatures. 
; Miracle of Regeneration: At the start of each 
of their Activations, the Communicant can remove 
one BLOOD MARKER from themselves, if they 
have any. 
; Bodyguard: If any model with the PILGRIM 
Keyword within 1” of the Communicant is hit 
by a ranged or melee weapon (excluding BLAST 
weapons), you can choose to redirect the hit 
against the Communicant instead. Determine 
the injuries exactly as if the weapon just hit 
the Communicant. 


Keywords 
PILGRIM, ELITE, STRONG, TOUGH 


“And in the hour of wrath, the 
heavens wept blood, for the swords 
of the wicked descended upon the 
innocent, their cries unheard and 
their souls lost in the abyss.” 


- Book of Lamentations 3:16 


36 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Troops: The Faithful 


Trench Pilgrim 
(Cost: 30 Ducats) 


A holy warrior of the trenches. Considers it his religious duty to make pilgrimage to the 
sacred battlefields to fight the heretic legions. Pilgrims wear the iron capirote to insulate 
their minds from the horrors of war. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Trench Pilgrim 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+0 Dice 
0 
25mm 
Martyr Penitent 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Trench Pilgrim can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the 
Trench Pilgrim Equipment List. 


Abilities 


; Resurrection: When a Trench Pilgrim dies, you may elect to re-buy them after 
the battle as a Martyr-Penitent resurrected by a Meta-Christ for a cost of 45 ducats. 
When hit, any attacks against a Martyr-Penitent add -1 DICE when rolling on 
the Injury Table. Their Melee bonus is increased to +1 DICE (reflected on the 
profile above). Martyr-Penitents retain any possessions they had before dying and 
being resurrected. 
; Zealot Strength: One Trench Pilgrim may have the Keyword STRONG at the 
cost of +5 ducats. 


Keywords 
PILGRIM 


Ecclesiastic Prisoners 
(Cost: 20 Ducats +35 
ducats for Martyrdom Device) 


Bound in chains, their minds consumed by a desperate resolve, Prisoners surge forward, 
driven by the hope that their sacrificial charge will somehow cleanse their tarnished souls. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Prisoner 
6”/Infantry N/A 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Ecclesiastic Prisoners are equipped with Iron Capirotes and this equipment cannot 
be removed, except by being Broken on the Wheel. Prisoners fight unarmed in melee, 
flailing feebly with their manacled arms. The -1D penalty to melee combat is already 
included in the profile above. Ecclesiastic Prisoners cannot be equipped with any 
weapons, armour or equipment from the Trench Pilgrims Armoury. They may be 
equipped with Martyrdom Devices for 35 ducats (LIMIT: 4, CONSUMABLE). 


; Martyrdom Device: A Prisoner strapped with a Martyrdom Device can trigger 
it at any point during their Activation. This does not require an ACTION. When 
detonated, the explosion is treated as a BLAST 3” weapon targeting the prisoner 
model. Models within 1” of the prisoner hit by the explosion roll their injuries with 
+1 DICE. The prisoner rolls 4d6 and adds them together to determine the results 
of their injury roll. If the explosive goes off and the prisoner somehow survives the 
battle, you can buy them a new explosive for 35 ducats as normal, or simply field 
them without. 


37 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


; Awaited: If the Ecclesiastic Prisoner is taken Out of Action by its Martyrdom 
Device, it does not count as being Out of Action for any rules related to Morale. 


Abilities 


; Mad Dash: Ecclesiastic Prisoner can add +1 DICE to their Dash ACTION. 


Keywords 
PILGRIM 


0-4 Stigmatic Nuns 
(Cost: 50 Ducats) 


Blessed with stigmata and unshakeable faith, these swordmaster nuns are the vanguard of 
any assault by the holy armies. 


“From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of our Lord and 
Saviour.” - Galatians 6:17 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Nun 
8”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Stigmatic Nuns can be equipped with any melee weapons, armour or equipment from 
the Trench Pilgrim Armoury. The only ranged weapons that Nuns can be equipped 
with are pistols, automatic pistols and warcrosses. 


Abilities 


; Blessed Stigmata: At the start of each of their Activations, 
any Stigmatic Nun can remove one BLOOD MARKER (but 
not an INFECTION MARKER) from themselves and 
convert it into a BLESSING MARKER. 
; Agile: Stigmatic Nuns may take any Dash ACTION 
or jump/climb/Diving Charge ACTION with +1 DICE. 


Keywords 
PILGRIM 


“Let the trumpets sound and let 
the banners unfurl, for it is in the 
violence of war that salvation is 
gained.” 


- Divinations 17:13 


38 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Anchorite Shrine 
(Cost: 140 Ducats) 


A colossal suit of machine armour fuelled by diesel and faith, the Shrine Anchorite stands 
as a grim symbol of humanity’s despair. Within its spiked, blood-stained interior, the pilot- 
monk endures a terrible form of penance, his anguished prayers and chants echoing across 
the battlefield. This grotesque amalgamation of suffering and devotion instils fear in the 
heart of the heretic, as the anchorite, a malevolent weapon draped in holy iconography and 
weeping gore, emerges to unleash a symphony of slaughter, where the wretched union of 
man and machine heralds the demise of all who oppose the Almighty. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Anchorite 
6”/Infantry N/A 
+2 Dice 
-3 
60mm 


Equipment 
You cannot buy additional equipment, weapons or armour for Anchorite Shrines. Each 
Anchorite Shrine is equipped with a suit of Machine Armour, a Combat Helmet, a 
Catherine Wheel and a Bonebreaker Mace. These pieces of equipment are built into 
the integrity of its construction and cannot be removed or lost in any way. The weapons 
are detailed below. The Anchorite may make one attack ACTION with each of these 
weapons in Melee Combat and may make no other attacks during its Activation (so it 
can make two attacks per Activation). 


; Catherine Wheel: The Anchorite Shrine treats the Catherine Wheel as a 
one-handed melee weapon with the Keywords RISKY and HEAVY that grants a 
+1 DICE bonus to hit (for a total of +3 DICE due to its Melee Characteristic). 
Because of the enormous weight and the skill of the Anchorite Shrine in inflicting 
maximum pain, the Catherine Wheel rolls on the Injury Chart with 3D6 (instead 
of usual 2D6), adding all three dice together! 
; Bonebreaker Mace: The Anchorite Shrine treats the Bonebreaker Mace as a 
one-handed melee weapon with the Keyword RISKY. The Bonebreaker Mace has 
a +1 DICE bonus to injure. Because the Mace is wielded alongside the Catherine 
Wheel, it is treated as an Off-Hand Weapon and suffers penalties accordingly. 


Abilities 


; Tough: The Shrine Anchorite is a huge, hulking mound of metal and is subject 
to the rules for TOUGH creatures. 
; Fear: The Anchorite causes FEAR. 
; Broken on the Wheel: Before the start of the battle, one Trench Pilgrim or 
Ecclesiastic Prisoner may voluntarily be broken on the wheel to show their piety 
and devotion (permanently remove all weapons, armour and equipment from the 
victim and use/store them as you wish). The Anchorite Shrine will then shatter the 
bones of the volunteer and carry the broken victim to the battle on its Wheel. As 
long as the volunteer is not taken Out of Action, any Attacks against the Anchorite 
are redirected to the volunteer. The volunteer cannot be independently targeted 
by any abilities or attacks (including BLAST weapons). For all rules purposes and 
attack effects (such as forced movement), the two models are treated as a single 
model, including sharing BLOOD, INFECTION and BLESSING MARKERS. Treat 
Down results against the volunteer as a Minor Hit. The volunteer cannot take any 
ACTIONS, be Activated separately or move – for obvious reasons. At the end of 
the battle, even if the volunteer may have survived, the model dies and is removed 
from your warband. 


Keywords 
PILGRIM, FEAR, TOUGH, STRONG 


“And lo, in the chambers of the 
Synod, ancient tomes whisper 
secrets of the future, their pages 
imbued with the knowledge of wars 
yet to be waged. Blessed are the 
seers, for they shall guide us with 
their visions.” 


- Divinations 1:7 


39 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


40 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: 
Procession of the Sacred 
Affliction 


Trench Pilgrims of the Procession of the Sacred 
Affliction are known for their zeal in close quarter 
combat, their armour decorated with icons and shields 
adorned with the depictions of the Saints, which despite 
appearances can withstand machine gun bullets. The 
millstones they carry upon their backs are used to tie 
about the necks of sinners before drowning them in the 
mud and blood of No Man’s Land. They spurn the use 
of the Iron Capirotes, believing firmly that faith alone is 
enough to withstand the horrors of Hell. 


Special Rules 


; Face thy Fears: No model in the Procession of 
the Sacred Affliction can wear Iron Capirotes. Those 
troops with Capirotes in their base profile will not 
have them, though their cost remains the same. 
; Reliquary Armoury: All models of this warband 
(save for the Anchorite) can buy Holy Icon Shields 
for 20 ducats, not just ELITE models. In addition, 
warband models with the ELITE Keyword may 
acquire Holy Icon Armour (see below). 
; Punishing Millstones: All models in the 
Procession of the Sacred Affliction (except 
Ecclesiastic Prisoners who are not worthy) add extra 
+1 DICE to injury rolls in melee against models 
that are Down. 
; Melee-focused: This warband may not have any 
Machine Guns. 
; Zealot Strength: Up to three Trench Pilgrims 
may purchase the Zealot Strength upgrade. 
; Hammer and the Anvil: The Anti-tank 
Hammers of this warband are not limited to ELITE. 
; Wrath of God: One Trench Pilgrim or 
Castigator in this warband can be gripped by the 
vengeful fury of the Lord. This model is immune to 
FEAR and disregards any BLOOD MARKERS from 
any source. This model may never wear armour, 
though they can carry a Trench Shield or Holy Icon 
Shield. Add +15 ducats to the cost of this model. 
This model may not carry any ranged weapons. 


Procession Special Equipment 
Holy Icon Armour 
30 ducats 
This suit of armour is made of blessed icons and scripture 
scrolls written with the blood of saints. This armour 
confers a -1 modifier to any injury rolls. This modifier 
applies even against attacks that ignore Armour. Can be 
combined with a shield, including Holy Icon Shield. 


Warband Variant: 
Cavalcade of the Tenth 
Plague 


This Trench Pilgrim Procession traditionally sacrifices 
lambs before battle, anointing themselves in its blood 
to ward off the wrath of God. The Pilgrims then draw 
holy symbols with the blood of the sacrifice upon their 
bodies, clothing and armour, and then march to battle 
singing hymns, in certain belief that the blood of the 
Lamb shields them from any harm. 


Firm believers in traditional reading of the Holy Texts, 
they reject the new doctrines of the Meta-Christ by 
the Church. They steal Communicants from other 
Processions and force them to fight for them in penance 
for being born from Sin. 


Special Rules 


; Blood Sacrifice: Any model (except Ecclesiastic 
Prisoners who are not worthy) in the warband can 
purchase a Sacrificial Lamb (see below). 
; Heaven Awaits: The Cavalcade rejects the 
doctrine of the Meta-Christ. Their dead Pilgrims 
cannot be resurrected as Martyr-Penitents. 
; The Unclean: The Cavalcade detests using the 
unclean Ecclesiastic Prisoners and may have only up 
to two of them. 
; Day of his Wrath: The War Prophet of this 
warband cannot use Laying on Hands but can call 
upon the Wrath of God instead. This is a RISKY 
ACTION. If successful, roll on the Injury Chart 
against one enemy model within 3” of the Prophet. 
Armour offers no protection against this attack. 
; Stolen Communicants: Communicants cost 
3 Glory Points instead of ducats for this warband 
due to the difficulty of acquiring and indoctrinating 
them. 
; Favour of the Lord: At the start of each turn, 
you can give any one model in the warband a 
BLESSING MARKER. 


Cavalcade Special Equipment 


Sacrificial Lamb 
5 ducats 
Before the battle, this lamb is sacrificed to God’s glory, 
and the pilgrim then anoints themselves with its blood, 
averting the wrath of Yahweh while fighting for His 
cause. The model ignores the first BLOOD MARKER or 
INFECTION MARKER it suffers in combat. 


Keywords 
CONSUMABLE 


41 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


42 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


The Iron Sultanate 


hen the Infidels opened the thrice- 
cursed Gate to Jahannam, releasing 
Gog and Magog upon those who 
believe, it seemed that all was lost and 
Shaytan would emerge victorious over 
Dunya. But the Creator of the Universe came to the aid 
of the Faithful, and as had been written, the great Iron 
Wall of Dhu al-Qarnayn manifested itself in the lands 
ruled by the Sultan of Rûm. A call was sent to those 
who believe righteously and, over the coming decades, 
the migration of the Faithful took place across Europa, 
Asia and Africa. Millions perished on the road and at 
sea, for the Heretics and their Shaytan lords swarmed 
them as locusts swarm fields of ripe sesame, devouring 
them and building vile monuments from their limbs 
and heads, so they could not be buried as is decreed 
in the Holy texts. But once all those who survived the 
journey had come, the mighty Gates of al-Qarnayn 
were closed and the Great Sultanate of the Invincible 
Iron Wall of the Two Horns That Pierce the Sky was 
formed. 
The assaults of the slaves of Jahannam against the 
Sultanate have never ceased since that day, and each day 
new martyrs are mourned as they defend the Wall and 
confront the heretics who have overcome its defences. 
But within the walls, the lost knowledge flourishes and 
from mosques of white marble and gold the muezzin 
call the faithful to pray for the success of the Sultan’s 
army as it struggles to protect their lands and defend 
the caravan trails that provide the Sultanate with vital 
trade goods. 
The Iron Wall is the greatest defensive work in the 
world, a mighty bulwark festooned with the famed 
artillery of the Sultan. Azeb sharpshooters stand at 
ready, ever watchful for surprise attacks, and the elite 
Janissary regiments have barracks at set intervals near 
the wall so they can react to any attack at speed. During 
a more serious incursion a full muster of Azebs is 
called, the House of Wisdom unleashes its terrifying 
takwin creations upon the foe, and if the need is 
desperate, the Sultan himself comes forth and his 


In the name of Allah, the 


Compassionating, the 


Compassionate! Praise be to 


Allah, The Beneficent King, The 


Creator of the Universe, Lord 


of the Three Worlds, Who set up 


The Firmament without Pillars 


in its Stead and Who stretched 


out the Earth even as a Bed; and 


Grace, and Prayer-Blessing be 


upon Our Lord Mohammed, Lord 


of Apostolic Men, and upon His 


Family and Companion-Train; 


Prayer and Blessings Enduring 


and Grace Which unto The Day of 


Doom shall Remain! 


- Scheherazade 


Glory to the Great Sultan, the 


Padishah of Rûm, the Dispenser 


of Crowns to the Monarchs on the 


face of the Earth, and the Shadow 


of God on Earth, Custodian of the 


Invincible Iron Wall of the Two 


Horns that pierce the Sky which 


protects us from the ravages of Gog 


and Magog! 


Janissaries march with him to do battle, carrying their 
green flag before them. 
Thus the protection of the Iron Wall has had an 
extensive influence on the Sultanate Way of war. The 
conscripted Azebs are experts at feigned flight and 
skirmish, while the loping Lions of Jabir harass the 
enemy’s flanks. All the while the superb artillery of 
the Sultan bombards the enemy as they make their 
tortuous journey across the battlefield littered with 
traps set by skilled Sappers. When they reach the 
ranks of the faithful, the Janissaries, Sultan’s elite 
household troops, close in and finish the enemy with 
their devastating counter-charge led by their iron- 
willed officers. Dreaded Assassins from Alamut prowl 
in the winds of time, striking the enemy elites and 
leaders, while the Alchemists of the House of Wisdom 
unleash devastating weapons made deadly by their 
elemental mastery, capable of overcoming the defences 
of virtually any foe. 
Beyond the Iron Wall forces of the Sultan operate 
in small, mobile companies, each with a particular 
mission to accomplish. They hunt down apostates 
that have gone to serve Shaytans, look for the relics 
from the time of the Prophets, or seek to recover lost 
treasures and books of knowledge from the ruins 
of the fallen Caliphates. Though an understanding 
between the Church and the Sultanate on being co- 
belligerents against Jahannam exists, the commanders 
of these expeditions will tolerate no interference and 
do not hesitate to crush those who would hinder 
their mission. Resentment against the infidels who 
unleashed Gog and Magog runs deep in the Sultanate, 
and matters of honour are swiftly resolved with duels to 
the death. Woe to those who dare to hinder the mission 
of Those Who Believe. 


W 


43 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Creation 


You have 700 ducats to recruit your initial force for the 
Campaign. For one-off battles, we suggest a typical force 
of 900 ducats and 8 Glory Points. 


Iron Sultanate Armoury 


Iron Sultanate forces can be equipped with the following 
weapons, armour and equipment. All exceptions are 
clearly listed here on the entries for each warrior or in 
the list below. If any item is marked as LIMIT, you can 
only have as many of these weapons at any point during 
the campaign as indicated in the brackets. Armaments 
marked as ELITE only are limited to the models with 
that Keyword. 


Ranged Weapons 
Jezzail 
7 ducats 
Siege Jezzail 
30 ducats 
Musket 
5 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Pistol 
6 ducats 
Shotgun 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug, 
Shield Combo) 
Alaybozan 
9 ducats (Sappers only, 
Shield Combo) 
Sniper Rifle 
35 ducats (ELITE and 
Janissaries only, 
LIMIT: 2) 
Grenades 
7 ducats 
Incendiary Grenades 
15 ducats (Alchemist 
only) 
Machine Gun 
50 ducats (LIMIT: 1) 
Flamethrower 
30 ducats (LIMIT: 3) 
MURAD Bombard 
50 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
Brazen Bull only) 
Flame Cannon 
60 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
Brazen Bull only) 


Melee Weapons 
Trench Knife 
1 ducat 
Bayonet 
2 ducats (Shield 
Combo) 
Trench Club 
3 ducats 
Sword/Axe 
4 ducats 
Polearm 
7 ducats (Shield 
Combo) 
Halberd-Gun 
20 ducats (ELITE only) 
Great Hammer/Maul 
10 ducats 
Great Sword or Axe 
12 ducats 
Titan Zulfiqar 
30 ducats 
(Brazen Bull only) 
Assassin’s Dagger 
15 ducats 
(Assassin only) 


Armour 
Standard Armour 
15 ducats 
Reinforced Armour 
40 ducats (ELITE & 
Janissaries only) 
Alchemist Armour 
50 ducats (ELITE only, 
LIMIT: 1) 
Trench Shield 
15 ducats 


Equipment 
Combat Helmet 
5 ducats 
Gas Mask 
5 ducats 
Shovel 
5 ducats 
Marid Shovel 
15 ducats (Brazen Bull 
only) 
Mountaineer Kit 
3 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 


Medi-Kit 
5 ducats 
Alchemical Ammunition 
3 ducats (any model 
armed with a Jezzail, 
Siege Jezzail, Alaybozan 
or Halberd-Gun) 
Musician’s instrument 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
Non-ELITE only) 
Cloak of Alamut 
25 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
ELITE only) 
Wind Amulet 
10 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Troop Flag 
1 Glory Point 
(LIMIT: 1) 
Binoculars 
10 ducats 
(ELITE only) 
Holy Relic 
2 Glory Points 
(ELITE only) 


44 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Sultanate Special Weapons, Armour & Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Iron Sultanate warband. 


Jezzail 
These long arms are by far the most common weapons carried by the soldiers of the Sultanate of the Great Iron Wall. Their 
barrels are smoothbore which limits their accuracy at range, but this is more than made up for by the fact that this allows 
them to be loaded with different types of alchemical ammunition made by the Jabirean Alchemists. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Jezzail 
2-handed 
18” 
- 
- 


MURAD Bombard 
Named after the great Sultan who commissioned the first of these weapons to defend the Iron Wall, this mighty bombard is 
used to disrupt advancing enemy formations. The echo of its blast recites the 99 names of Allah, throwing even the greatest 
of warriors to ground like chaff. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
MURAD Bombard 1-handed 
36” 
- 
HEAVY, 
BLAST 3” 


Rules: Specify a point on the battlefield within 36” (must be in line of sight) that you want to target. Next, take a 
Ranged Attack ACTION. If the roll fails (i.e. you roll 6 or less), the bomb lands 1” away from its intended location, 
multiplied by the number representing the degree of failure (for example, if you rolled 5, the bombard shot lands 2” 
away, as 7-5=2). The direction is decided by your opponent. All models within 3” of the landing 1x1mm landing spot 
are hit as the bomb explodes – no roll to hit is needed. If the bomb lands directly on top of any model, roll with 3D6 
on the Injury Chart and add the dice together to see what happens! Other models hit by the bombard suffer a Down 
result due the booming shockwave, but do not incur any BLOOD MARKERS or other effects from this attack. 


Flame Cannon 
A great cannon that shoots a stream of alchemical fire with tremendous force. It has a tendency to overheat and ignite the 
skin of its artillery crew, but the mighty Brazen Bulls use them as mere handguns. The secret formula used for the fuel of 
the Flame Cannons was gleaned from the lost Byzantine ruins, and is commonly known as Greek Fire. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Flame Cannon 
1-handed 
12” 
- 
HEAVY, FIRE 


Rules: When shot in ranged combat, draw a straight 12” line that is 1mm wide from the Brazen Bull. All models 
along the path of the line are automatically hit – roll for their injuries immediately. Armour does not protect against 
the Flame Cannon. Due to the Keyword FIRE, its hits cause an additional +1 BLOOD MARKER. This is applied after 
rolling for injuries. 


Titan Zulfiqar 
This twin-tongued greatsword can weigh up to 300 pounds – only the mighty Brazen Bulls can even lift this monstrous 
blade, let alone wield it in combat. It sheer weight and mono-molecule sharpness cuts through even the thickest armour 
when swung by the superhuman strength of the takwin monstrosity. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Zulfiqar 
1-handed 
Melee 
+2 to injury rolls 
HEAVY, 
CRITICAL 


Rules: Add +2 to the result of all injuries caused by this weapon (i.e. a roll of 7 on the Injury Chart becomes 9). 


45 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Assassin’s Dagger 
The blades of the Assassins are imbued with the Supreme Poison. In chambers deep below the surface, generations of young 
assassins are raised in the dark; fed a diet of scorpions, frogs, deadly mushrooms and even stranger, more noxious things, 
and generation by generation their tolerance grows. The poisonous blood of these willing vessels is drawn and smelted into 
a poisonous iron. The iron is forged into blades and deadly spells of slaying layered into each fold of the envenomed metal. 
Thus the blood of the first generation of Assassins lives to this day, growing more potent with each generation. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Assassin’s Dagger 
1-handed 
Melee 
+1 to Injury 
CRITICAL 


Rules: Adds +1 to injury rolls (i.e. a roll of 7 on the Injury Chart becomes 8). If the Assassin hits an enemy and causes 
at least one BLOOD MARKER, the Assassin can move away from combat during this Activation. Note that this move 
does not grant enemies free attacks. Assassins can use both normal and Dash move to do this, though this may not be 
used for charging. 


Halberd-Gun 
Invention of the House of Wisdom, this weapon acts both as a symbol of high rank and an excellent weapon in combat. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Halberd-Gun 
2-handed 
Melee/24” 
- 
ASSAULT, 
CUMBERSOME 


Rules: Enemies charging a model equipped with a Halberd-gun add -1 DICE in melee combat when rolling to hit. 
This only applies when a model attacks after a charge, not on subsequent rounds of melee. 


Siege Jezzail 
Heavier version of the standard Jezzail. It is a large, cumbersome weapon with a shot of lead or iron weighing as much as 
four pounds, designed to take out even the most powerful enemies with a single shot. Azebs armed with these weapons use 
tripod stakes when firing them, but the mighty Janissaries often use them as their standard service gun. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Siege Jezzail 
2-handed 
30” 
+1D to Injuries 
HEAVY 


Rules: Roll all injuries with +1 DICE. 


Alaybozan 
The design of this blunderbuss is based on the traditional design of tribal warriors but thoroughly modernised by the 
foundries of the Sultanate. It has proven its worth as the preferred weapon of the Sapper corps who must often fight in 
close quarters. It shoots a hail of lead bullets and iron shrapnel. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Alaybozan 
2-handed 
12” 
- 
SHRAPNEL 


Alchemist Armour 
Suit of armour which protects against almost all harm. This is an essential tool of Alchemists’ craft, festooned with the 
Seals of Solomon which enables them to bend the elements of Creation to their will and shields them even from the 
devices of Hell. 


Rules: Counts as Reinforced Armour and therefore grants a -2 modifier to all injury rolls made against the model 
wearing it. All attacks with the Keyword FIRE and/or GAS suffer a -1 DICE penalty to injure this model. 
Additionally, this model does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS caused by the Keywords FIRE and/or GAS. 


46 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Alchemical Ammunition 
Jabirean Alchemists craft these Jezzail bullets from the slivers of the Iron Wall. Each such shot is carved the Seal of 
Solomon, guiding them during their path through the air. 


Rules: Adds +1 DICE to Ranged Attack rolls on the Action Success Chart. Can only be used with Jezzails, 
Alaybozan, Halberd-Guns and Siege Jezzails. 


Cloak of Alamut 
Created by the secret arts of the Assassin’s sect aeons ago, this cloak bends the light so that its wearer looks almost 
indistinguishable against any surface when they are still. It is this masterwork of Alamut that has led to the tales of the 
fabled Cloak of Invisibility in the legends of the Sultanate. 


Rules: All ranged attacks against a model that is in cover suffer -2 DICE penalty instead of -1 DICE. All the 
normal rules for cover apply otherwise. 


Wind Amulet 
Amulet created by the Jabirean Alchemists, capturing the essence of the Element of Wind within it. 


Rules: Once per battle, you may add +3” to the Movement characteristic of this model once during the activation. 
Declare this when the model is Activated. 


Marid Shovel 
You can buy this enormous shovel made from alchemical bronze which makes it almost indestructible. Brazen bulls use it 
for public works (such as digging canals, foundations of buildings and mining) during peacetime, while at war it is used 
for digging trenches, ditches and bunkers. 


Rules: The Marid Shovel has the Keyword HEAVY which allows a Brazen Bull to use it. Otherwise it works exactly 
like a normal shovel. 


47 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


48 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Sultan’s Elite 


1 Yüzbaşı Captain 
(Cost: 70 Ducats) 


Your warband must include a Yüzbaşı Captain when it is created. 


Military expeditions over the Great Iron Wall into No Man’s Land carry many risks, and 
their commanders are field officers known as Yüzbaşı. They are expected to lead from the 
front and their selection is solely on merit, with no consideration given to family pedigree or 
wealth. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Yüzbaşı 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
Yüzbaşı can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Iron 
Sultanate Equipment List. 


Abilities 


; Tough: Yüzbaşı captains are selected amongst the very best soldiers of the 
Sultanate, and their bodies are hardened against injury by the Jabirean arts. They 
are subject to the rules for TOUGH creatures. 
; Mubarizun: Yüzbaşı is expected to face the mightiest of their enemies in 
personal combat, inspiring the troops to victory with their personal prowess. 
Yüzbaşı are immune to the effects of the Keyword FEAR and add +1 DICE to 
injury rolls against TOUGH opponents. 


Keywords 
ELITE, SULTANATE, TOUGH 


0-1 Jabirean Alchemist 
(Cost: 55 Ducats) 


The Jabirean Alchemist is a master of esoteric powers, able to control fire and ice, metal 
and liquid; capable of creating intricate mechanical devices and artificial life as well 
as weapons of calamitous potency. In exchange for the freedom to practise their arts, the 
Alchemists supply the Sultanate with the peerless Jabirean battle lions, and serve on the 
front lines where their devastating alchemical compounds melt the flesh from the bones of 
the Unbelievers, or dissolve through even the toughest enemy armour. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Alchemist 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Alchemist can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the 
Iron Sultanate Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Mastery of the Elements: At the beginning of a battle, all ranged and melee 
weapons that an Alchemist has been equipped with may be assigned one of the 
following Keywords: SHRAPNEL, FIRE or GAS added to them. All the weapons 
the Alchemist has will share the same Keyword. With a RISKY ACTION with +1 
DICE, the Alchemist can change this Keyword into one of the others. 


Keywords 
ELITE, SULTANATE 


49 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Sultanate Assassin 
(Cost: 85 Ducats) 


Assassins are a legendary order of mystic warriors, whispered about the world over for their 
secrecy and ruthlessness. Assassins are able to bend space and time using the sacred rituals 
and powerful hallucinogens discovered by magi of the order. With this esoteric power 
they prowl behind enemy lines, hunting their targets with merciless efficiency. They can 
seemingly appear in two places simultaneously, strike a foe with startling speed and then 
travel back into time to a moment a few heartbeats before, safe from any retaliation. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Assassin 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Assassin can be equipped with any weapon, armour or equipment from the Iron 
Sultanate Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Time Slip: If any type of attack (melee, ranged, mine etc.) misses the Assassin, 
they may slip into a moment in the future. The Assassin can move 
into any unoccupied space within 6”, though they cannot be 
moved within 1” of any enemy model or leave the gaming table. If 
moving out of melee this way, enemies do not get free attacks. 
; Temporal Assassin: After the Assassin makes a Charge Roll, 
but before it moves toward its target, you may instead choose to 
have the Assassin split itself through time if it has not already 
taken a Melee Attack ACTION this Activation. Choose up to two 
enemy models within the charging distance of the Assassin. Then, 
place the Assassin into base contact with each enemy model, one 
after the other. It may make a Melee Attack against each one with 
a single melee weapon that it is equipped with. After the attacks 
(and any resulting effects) have been resolved, place the Assassin 
at either location. The Assassin cannot make any further melee 
attacks during this Activation. 
; Infiltrator: The Assassin can be placed anywhere on the table 
out of line of sight of any enemies, but at least 8” 
away from the closest enemy. Deployed after all other 
models without the Keyword INFILTRATOR. 


Keywords 
ELITE, SULTANATE, INFILTRATOR 


50 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Those Who Believe 


Azebs 
(Cost: 25 Ducats) 


Azebs are soldiers recruited from the multitude of provinces of the sultanate, where every house in 
twenty is required to equip and provide a warrior to serve the Prince of Those Who Believe. They 
are often used by their superiors as light skirmishers to harass and tie down the enemies while the 
heavier troops close in for the kill. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Azeb 
6”/Infantry 0 Dice 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Azebs can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Iron Sultanate 
Armoury. Any Azebs can be converted to SKIRMISHERS at the cost of +5 ducats per 
model. Unless engaged in melee, when an enemy model declares a charge against any 
Skirmisher Azeb, they can immediately move D3” in any direction they wish (except 
within 1” of any enemy or out of the battlefield). After this manoeuvre, the charging model 
is moved as normal. This may lead to the charger being unable to enter melee. This move 
cannot be taken by a model that is Down. 


Keywords 
SULTANATE 


0-2 Sultanate Sappers 
(Cost: 50 Ducats) 


The Sultan’s Sappers are highly respected and valued specialists in the Sultan’s army. They are 
expected to man the great cannons of the Iron Wall no matter what the enemies throw at them, 
and since their mighty artillery is prone to overheating, they are easily identified by the terrible 
burns all over their bodies. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Sapper 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+0 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Sappers are equipped with shovels. This equipment can never be removed. They can be 
equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Iron Sultanate Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Mine-setting: As an ACTION with +2 DICE, the Sapper can mine a piece of 
terrain they alone are touching, no bigger than 8” x 8” (an 8” section of trench, a wall, 
a tree, a building etc). If successful, the terrain piece is now mined. Any model (except 
the Sapper who set the mine) who moves into contact with the terrain piece will 
trigger the mine. Roll on the Injury Chart to see what happens to the model. The mine 
has the Keyword SHRAPNEL. After this, the terrain piece is no longer mined. 
; De-mine: As a RISKY ACTION the Sapper can disable any mine (see Scenarios) 
they move in contact with. If they fail, the mine blows causing damage as per the rules. 
; Forward Positions: When the Sapper is set up during standard deployment, it can 
be placed up to 6” away from its player’s Deployment Zone. If deployed in this way, 
it must be in contact with a piece of scenery. This ability cannot be used if playing a 
scenario that does not allow the use of INFILTRATORS. 
; Fortify: During their Activation, a Sapper can take a RISKY ACTION with +1 
DICE. If successful, the Sapper is considered to be in Cover until the model moves. 
This ACTION cannot be used if the model is in melee combat. 


Keywords 
SULTANATE 


51 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-2 Lions of Jabir 
(Cost: 60 Ducats) 


Named after the deadly hunters of the plains, the Lions of Jabir can take many forms, not 
all of them leonine. Each one is a unique masterwork, and they are grown according to the 
skills and artistry of the Jabirean scientist that created them. The speed and ferocity of the 
Lions is nearly unmatched, and some even have strange powers granted by their alchemical 
birth. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Lion of Jabir 
8”/Infantry NA 
+1 Dice 
0 
30 x 60mm 
oval base 


Equipment 
Lions can be equipped with armour (except shields) and Wind Amulets. They cannot 
be equipped with any other items. They do not suffer penalties for fighting unarmed. 


Abilities 


; Artificial Body: Created through the Jabirean alchemy, the Lions have no vital 
organs and they must be dismembered in order to kill them. All injury rolls against 
the Lion are made with -1 DICE. 
; Mauling: A Downed opponent cannot stand up if it is in melee combat with a 
Lion of Jabir (even if the Lion is Down itself ), unless it is on a 40mm or larger base. 
; Lion’s Grace: Lions of Jabir may take any Dash/Jump/Climb/Diving Charge 
ACTION with a +1 DICE bonus. 


Keywords 
SULTANATE 


0-6 Janissaries 
(Cost: 55 Ducats) 


The janissaries are the Sultanate’s elite warriors, raised from childhood in the arts of war. 
Captured during raids upon the desolate northern and eastern marches beyond the Iron 
Wall, they are subjected to rigorous martial training and indoctrination from an early age. 
On the battlefield, Janissaries excel at devastating counter-charges, crushing the enemy elite 
formations and acting as the bodyguard for high-ranking individuals. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Janissary 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
Janissaries can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Iron 
Sultanate Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Strong: Janissaries ignore the effect of the Keyword HEAVY on any weapon 
they wield. 
; Counter-Charge: If the first ACTION a Janissary makes during their Activation 
is a Charge, they can add +1 DICE to their subsequent Melee Attack ACTIONS 
during this Activation. 


Keywords 
SULTANATE, STRONG 


52 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Brazen Bull 
(Cost: 100 Ducats) 


The Brazen Bull is a monstrous being of immense power and vitality, capable of tearing 
even the bastard child of a devil clean in half. The Sultan’s armourers equip the Bulls with 
heavy artillery that even the superhuman Janissaries cannot lift, let alone use in battle: 
flame cannons, volley guns and holy blades blessed by the Word of the Great Protector. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Brazen Bull 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
60mm 


Equipment 
A Brazen Bull can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Iron 
Sultanate Armoury. Due to its vast strength and size it can only use weapons with the 
Keyword HEAVY – it will simply crush weapons of normal size by accident. It can carry 
up to two Brazen Bull Only weapons. 


Abilities 


; Tough: Brazen Bulls are almost impervious to pain. They are subject to the 
rules for TOUGH creatures. 
; Strong: The Brazen Bull ignores the effect of the Keyword HEAVY on any 
weapon they wield. 
; Artificial Body: Created through the Jabirean alchemy, the Brazen Bulls have 
no vital organs and they have to be hacked apart to kill them. All attacks against 
the Brazen Bull roll injuries with -1 DICE. 
; Trample: Once during its Activation, the Brazen Bull may make an extra 
Melee Attack ACTION against a Downed enemy model on a 32mm or smaller base. 
Resolve the attack as if the Brazen Bull was armed with a Trench Club. This attack 
ignores armour as the Brazen Bull stomps their enemies into a pulp. 
; Terrifying: The Brazen Bull is a monstrous, gigantic creature that causes FEAR. 


Keywords 
SULTANATE, FEAR, TOUGH, STRONG 


53 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: Fida’i 
of Alamut – The Cabal of 
Assassins 


The pact between the Iron Sultanate and the Assassin 
fortress of Alamut ensures that the Sultan is served by 
the exquisitely skilled killers of the Old Man of the 
Mountain in exchange for independence of the Assassin’s 
domain. 


But though most outsiders know the Assassins through 
their service to the forces of the Iron Wall, sometimes 
during the dark of night small, deadly bands move 
silently into the hellscape of No Man’s Land. In deepest 
secrecy Rashid al-Din Sinan, the undisputed ruler of 
Alamut dispatches his hand-picked disciples on Missions 
of his own, communicating their orders with no spoken 
words, signs nor written messages, but talking directly 
to them in their dreams. What the purpose of such 
operations is no-one knows, and not even the most 
sadistic Heretic torturer-priest has been able to make 
them divulge the secrets of Alamut from captured 
Assassins. These warbands are known as Fida’i (which 
means ‘Sacrifice’), dedicated to completing their mission 
and returning to Alamut to receive rewards said to be 
able to match those of Paradise itself. They are led by a 
Master Assassin: one of the deadly Hands of Alamut, 
with two fully-trained members of the Order. A number 
of trainee acolytes will serve them during the mission, 
eager to prove their mettle and be initiated into the 
Order of Assassins. 


Alamut is also a home to a renegade sect of Ismaili 
Dervishes, warrior monks sworn to poverty and a lethal 
way of fighting. They accompany the Assassins on their 
secret missions as an act of piety and payment for their 
shelter, and their whirling dance of death has been the 
end of many a disbeliever. 


Fida’i of Alamut Rules 
The Fida’i of Alamut Warband has the following special 
rules: 


; Flock of Assassins: The Fida’i of Alamut can 
have up to three Assassins. The warband must 
include a Master Assassin that counts as one of the 
three (see below). 
; Master Assassin: A Master Assassin has the 
Keyword TOUGH. The Master Assassin costs 95 
ducats. 
; Assassin Acolytes: Up to three Azebs of the 
warband can have the Keyword INFILTRATOR at 
the cost of +10 ducats per model. 
; Alamut Alone: The warband may not include 
Yüzbaşı, Alchemist, Janissaries, Lions of Jabir or 


Brazen Bulls. 
; Killing Squad: Your warband may have a single 
Fireteam. These Fireteams may consist of any two 
models from your warband. Models in Fireteams 
gain the Keyword FIRETEAM. 
; Dervishes: The warband may include up to 
four Dervishes (use Janissary statistics including 
Armoury selection, but they cannot use Reinforced 
Armour). These troops have the Whirling Dervishes 
special rule instead of the Keyword STRONG: 
; Whirling Dervishes: The ritual Dance of 
the Dervishes is hypnotic to witness, and it is 
as graceful as it is deadly. All Ranged attacks 
against Dervishes suffer -1 DICE penalty. 
Dervishes do not suffer the normal -1 DICE to 
hit for fighting with an Off-Hand weapon. 


Art of Assassination 
Any Assassin of the warband may buy any one of these 
abilities at the cost indicated below. There cannot be any 
duplicates in the warband and you can only buy one for 
each Assassin. 


Hallucinogen Disguise 
20 ducats 
An INFILTRATOR with this ability can be deployed 
anywhere on the battlefield, including the enemy 
Deployment Zone, as long as the model is at least 8” 
away from any enemy models. The model does not have 
to be out of Line of Sight. Binoculars or Guard Dogs 
have no effect on this ability. 


Thunderbolt of Alamut 
20 ducats 
The model has +2” movement and +1 DICE on its 
Dash ACTIONS. 


Mirage of Time 
15 ducats 
Both Ranged and Melee attacks against the Assassin 
suffer -1 DICE penalty when determining if they hit. 


Secret Paths 
10 ducats 
At the start of the battle, right before the first model is 
set up, declare whether or not this model will be set up 
by using Secret Paths. A model using the Secret Paths is 
not set up on the battlefield at the start of the battle and 
it may not be activated normally during the first turn. 


Starting in the second turn, you may activate these 
models. When you do, set up the model in contact with 
an edge of the battlefield but more than 8” away from 
all enemy models at the start of its activation. If both 
players have such models, the starting player declares 
whether one of their models is deployed or not first, 
followed by the other player. Alternate as normal until 
all such models have been declared as using Secret Paths 
or not. 


54 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Fida’i of Alamut Special Weapons and Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Fida’i of Alamut Warband. 


Golden Khanjar 
20 ducats 
Placed on a hand of an especially favoured killer by the Old Man of the Mountain himself, these wickedly curved daggers 
gleam as if they were made of gold, but instead they are crystallised poison, and allow their wielder to attack twice in the 
same instance of time. Only the Master of Alamut himself knows the secret of making these blades. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Golden Khanjar 
1-handed 
Melee 
+1 Injury, 2 Attacks 


Rules: Adds +1 to injury rolls (i.e. a roll of 7 on the Injury Chart becomes 8). A model armed with a Golden Khanjar 
can make two attacks instead of one in melee with one Melee Attack ACTION. This effect also applies to a Golden 
Khanjar wielded off-hand. 


Assassin Only, LIMIT: 2 


Bow of Alamut 
50 ducats 
This terrifying double-stringed bow shoots its deadly barbs through both time and space. Its arrows can reach impossible 
distances and pass through armour by flickering through time. It leaves behind a temporal slipstream that the Assassin can 
travel through in an eyeblink. 


Made from wood taken from trees planted in the skulls of ancient assassins in the Garden of Alamut so that they might 
absorb mystic powers of their former owners, these bows are some of the greatest treasures of the Old Man of the Mountain 
for it is said that only six now remain in his secret armouries. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Bow of Alamut 
2-handed 
40” 
Ignores Armour 
CRITICAL 


Rules: Ignores Armour. If the Assassin hits a model and causes at least one BLOOD MARKER, the Assassin may 
instantly place itself into Melee Combat with that model if there is a legal space that the Assassin could occupy 
within 1” of that model, regardless of the distance to the target or any interposing models/obstacles. The Assassin is 
considered to have charged that model, although it does not count as a Charge ACTION and therefore the Assassin 
can take the Move ACTION at a later point on this turn, if it hasn’t already. Note that if the bow takes the target Out 
of Action, no BLOOD MARKERS are caused and this movement cannot be made. 


Assassin Only, LIMIT: 1 


Hashashin Leaf 
5 ducats 
These leaves from the secret Garden of Alamut enhance the strength of anyone who eats them threefold. Once the effect 
wears off the subject will suffer from agonising muscle tears and ripping of ligaments, but many of the Order of Assassins 
feel that this is a small price to pay for being able to use deadlier weapons. 


Rules: Before the battle begins, a model may use this item to gain the Keyword STRONG until the end of a battle. 
CONSUMABLE, LIMIT: 4. 


55 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: 
The House of Wisdom 


“Read in the name of thy Lord and Cherisher, Who 
Created man, out of a clot of congealed blood: Proclaim! 
And thy Lord is Most Bountiful, He Who taught the pen, 
Taught man that which he knew not.” 
-Surah 96 


The House of Wisdom is the pre-eminent centre 
of learning within the Iron Sultanate. Its libraries, 
workshops, forges, gardens of exotic and wondrous 
plants, hospitals and observatories are unmatched. 
Within its halls are mechanical marvels and weapons 
from far-off lands, as well as trophies captured by the 
Sultan’s forces and brought to be examined by the 
learned scholars of the House of Wisdom. Philosophers 
and theologists debate in its chambers; ghanzal and 
qasīda poets compose verses describing the beauty and 
pain of life. Thus it is no wonder that the House attracts 
the greatest minds of the age to study in its hallowed 
halls, from within the Sultanate and far beyond the Iron 
Wall. 


In its laboratories guarded by the faithful Kavass, the 
Jabirean Alchemists dissect and study the War Beasts 
of Shaitan so their weaknesses can be laid bare and 
exploited by the Believers. At such times, their roars of 
rage and pain echo through the porphyry corridors of 
the House. 


To maintain a degree of independence, regardless of the 
royal funding, the House of Wisdom performs many 
services for the Sultan’s armies. Their best alchemists 
work with the Sultanate foundries where the Great 
Cannons of the Iron Wall are cast. Takwin creations are 
provided to bolster the army of Those Who Believe, as 
are suits of armour and alchemical ammunition. The 
House of Wisdom also maintains the Sultanate fleet of 
airships, which both guard the realms of Those Who 
Believe against enemy air forces and maintain vigil over 
lands under darkness. They make regular excursions 
deep into enemy territory to witness whether the Great 
Sandstorm still covers the Two Holy Places, reporting 
any news back to the Sultan. 


In exchange, the masters of the House of Wisdom 
have freedom to despatch their own excursions and 
expeditions into the lands beyond the wall, to seek tomes 
of knowledge lost in the dark and terrible days when 
the forces of Jahannam overran much of the Levant 
and great cities fell like blossoms of a Jasmine flower in 
fiery heat. Sometimes they are journeys to capture an 
especially ferocious beast of the enemy. At other times 
they seek to capture or kill Heretic Alchemists which 
they see as both an offence to their craft and a threat to 
the entire world. 


These journeys are exceedingly dangerous and they are 
not undertaken lightly. Each Alchemist dispatched on 
such a journey is an irreplaceable loss, and since they 
operate under their own authority, they cannot expect 
direct support from the Sultan’s forces. Many noble Fāris 
warriors have taken oaths to protect these scholars in 
their journeys, as well as their own Kavass bodyguards 
sworn to fight and die in defence of their Masters. 


House of Wisdom Rules 
The House of Wisdom warband has the following 
special rules: 


; Alchemists: The House of Wisdom warband 
may have up to two Alchemists and must include at 
least one. This warband treats Alchemist Armour as 
if they had a LIMIT of 2. 
; Pride of Jabir: The warband may include up to 
three Lions of Jabir. 
; Private Venture: The warband may not include 
any Azebs, Janissaries, Yüzbaşi or Assassins. 
; Noble Guardians: The warband may include up 
to two Fāris – noble warriors sworn to protect the 
House of Wisdom. They use the Janissary stats but 
have the Keywords ELITE and STRONG. 
; Kavass: Kavass are sworn guardians of the House 
of Wisdom. They use Azebs stats but cannot buy the 
Keyword SKIRMISHER. Instead, up to three Kavass 
can increase their Melee Characteristic by +1 DICE 
(to +0D) at the cost of +5 ducats per model. 
; Weapon Collections: When you create this 
warband, choose two weapons. These weapons must 
be found in either the Armouries of New Antioch 
or the Trench Pilgrims. These weapons must not 
already be present in the Iron Sultanate Armoury. 
Your warband may acquire one of each of these 
weapons, following all of the same limitations and 
costs of the original lists. Only one weapon can 
be picked from this list. If lost in battle, it can be 
repurchased by paying the indicated cost. 


56 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Secrets of the House of Wisdom 


Any Alchemist of the warband may buy any one of these Abilities at the cost indicated below. You cannot have 
duplicates of these abilities in the Warband, as the House of Wisdom does not want to risk depleting the number of 
their scholars in a single discipline. 


Medicine 
15 ducats 
This Alchemist is a student of Ibn Sina’s School of Medicine. The model is equipped with tools for healing from the 
House of Wisdom. The Alchemist can take an ACTION with +1 DICE to remove up to two BLOOD MARKERS 
or a single INFECTION MARKER from any one friendly model (including themselves) within 1” range or allow 
one friendly model (including themselves) who is Down to regain their footing. This training and these tools are an 
improvement upon the standard Medi-Kit and therefore a model with this Secret cannot carry a Medi-Kit. 


Cartography & Geometry 
20 ducats 
The Alchemist has studied long and hard the sciences of cartography and geometry. At the beginning of each battle, 
immediately before any models are deployed, up to two models in your warband gain the Keyword INFILTRATOR, 
This ability cannot affect an Alchemist or a model with a base larger than 32mm. In addition, the warband may re- 
roll one Exploration dice in the Exploration phase if you wish. The second result stands. 


Secrets of Takwin 
20 ducats 
The Alchemist has bound their Takwin creature to themselves with unbreakable bonds. If the Alchemist is hit by 
an attack while within 1” of their Homunculus, you may redirect the hit to the Homunculi instead. Determine the 
injuries and additional effects exactly as if the weapon just hit the Homunculi. 


Chemistry & Alchemy 
25 ducats 
Before the battle starts, but after all models (including INFILTRATORS) are deployed, you may place a rectangular 
elemental obstacle 2” wide and 6” long. It counts both as Difficult Terrain and Dangerous Terrain, and damage it 
causes has the Keyword FIRE, GAS or SHRAPNEL (chosen when the obstacle is placed). It cannot be placed within 
6” of any model or on top of any other Terrain. 


Philosophy, Poetry and Theology 
20 ducats 
The Alchemist is well-versed in the hidden truths of the universe and of the Divine, and has a calm and clear mind. 
The warband gains +1 DICE to all Morale Rolls, cannot become Shaken and the Alchemist plus another model of 
your choice is immune to the effects of the Keyword FEAR. 


57 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Takwin Creatures 


You can bring one Takwin creature for each Alchemist in your warband. Each Takwin creature must be associated 
with an Alchemist in your warband. If a Takwin creature’s associated Alchemist is killed (typically by acquiring three 
scars), that Takwin creature cannot be fielded, its equipment cannot be changed and no Alchemical Formulae may 
be applied to it. When you acquire a new Alchemist, if you have any unallocated Takwin creatures, you must allocate 
that new Alchemist with one of your unallocated Takwin creatures. Instead of using Glory, you must buy them with 
ducats as indicated on the list below. 


Takwin Homunculus 
40 ducats 


Name 
Movement 
Ranged 
Melee 
Armour Base 
Homunculus 
6”/Infantry 
+0 Dice 
+0 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
The homunculus cannot be equipped with any weapons, armour or equipment. It can fight in melee without any 
penalty. 


Abilities 


; Re-creation: If the Homunculus is taken Out of Action during battle, and is deemed to have been killed in 
the post-battle sequence, you do not have to remove it from your roster. Instead, you can spend 40 ducats at any 
time between battles to bring it back to life with all of its weapons and abilities. 
; Artificial Body: Created through the Jabirean alchemy, the Homunculus has no vital organs and they have to 
be dismembered in order to kill them. All injury rolls against the Homunculus are made with -1 DICE. 


Keywords 
SULTANATE 


Alchemical formulae 
You may buy any of these Alchemical Formulae for your Homunculus, either during its creation or later during any 
Post-Battle Sequence, as long as you pay the price of each formula. Once bought they are permanent. 


You can never have more than one Alchemic Formula of the same type applied into a single Takwin creature unless 
otherwise specified. 


; Wings (30 ducats): The Homunculus gains a new movement mode: 8”/Flying. 
; Elemental Resistance (40 ducats): Attacks made against the Homunculus that have the Keywords FIRE 
and/or GAS suffer a -1 DICE penalty to injure it. Also the Homunculus does not suffer additional BLOOD 
MARKERS from attacks with Keywords FIRE and/or GAS. 
; Massive size (30 ducats): The Homunculus’ size is increased to huge proportions. It now has a base size of 
50mm and it gains the Keyword TOUGH. This formula cannot be combined with the Wings formula. 
; Enslaved Mind (10 ducats): The Homunculus gains the Keyword FIRETEAM along with one model of your 
choice in the Warband. The other model can only form a Fireteam with this Homunculi, not with any other 
models. 
; Human hands (10 ducats): The Homunculus can buy and wield any weapon allowed in the Iron Sultanate 
warband or House of Wisdom list, though they cannot select ELITE only items, grenades or items limited 
to specific units (such as Assassins). They can also carry a Trench Shield or a Fire Shield. This will apply to the 
Additional Arms formula as well. Cannot be combined with the Wings formula. 
; Inhuman Strength (15 ducats): The musculature of the Homunculus is reinforced, replaced and 
strengthened. It now has a base size of 32mm (or 50mm if it also has Massive size). The Homunculus gains +1 
DICE to its Melee characteristic and the Keyword STRONG. 
; Terrifying Appearance (10 ducats): Whether by captivating beauty or a terrifying appearance, this 
Homunculus gains the Keyword FEAR. 
; Additional Arm (15 ducats): The Homunculus can perform an additional attack ACTION in Melee or 
Ranged combat without any penalty. Therefore, if making attacks with three melee weapons, only a single 


58 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


weapon would need to be declared an Off-Hand weapon (suffering the appropriate penalties). It has three hands 
to carry weapons if combined with Human Hands, and may equip weapons and a shield in any combination, as 
long as it has hands free to do so. In this case the Homunculi can make up to two Ranged Attack ACTIONS (if it 
has sufficient weapons and number of hands to carry them), and up to three Melee Attack ACTIONS (if armed 
with three one-handed weapons); or one Melee Attack ACTION with a two-handed weapon and one Melee 
Attack ACTION with a one-handed weapon. 
; Two heads (5 ducats): The Homunculus has two heads and therefore can have two sets of eyes via Alchemical 
Formula. 
; Hypnotic Eyes (15 ducats): Enemies suffer -1 DICE to hit the Homunculus in Melee. Does not affect 
Sniper Priests or enemies with the keyword BLACK GRAIL. Cannot be combined with Hawk Eyes without Two 
Heads. 
; Hawk Eyes (10 ducats): The eyesight of the Homunculus is based on that of a predatory bird. It can add +1 
DICE to its Ranged Attack characteristic. Cannot be combined with Hypnotic Eyes without Two Heads. 
; Startling Speed (10 ducats): The Homunculus adds +1 DICE to its Dash ACTIONS. 
; Seal of Solomon (10 ducats): This Formula greatly enhances the intelligence of the Homunculus and makes 
it painfully aware of its artificial existence. It can now buy and use Equipment from the Sultanate Warband 
Armoury as long as it is not limited to ELITE models. Note that one helmet protects a Homunculus with two 
heads normally and the Two Heads Formula does not allow the purchase of two different kinds of headgear. 
; Gargantuan Size (20 ducats): Can only be bought if the Homunculus already has the Human Hands, 
Inhuman Strength and Massive Size Formulas. The Homunculus now has a Base Size of 60mm and it can now 
use one Brazen Bull Only weapon. 
; Regenerative Tissue (25 ducats): The Homunculus has an astonishing healing factor and can remove one 
BLOOD MARKER every time it is Activated, if it has any. 


House of Wisdom Special Armoury 


The following items are exclusively available to the House of Wisdom warband. 


Elixir of Al-Khidr 
10 ducats 
An extraordinary creation of the House of Wisdom. It is said that within its Gardens is the hidden Fountain of Life that is 
used as an ingredient of this powerful Alchemical formula. 


Rules: Gives the model consuming the Elixir Keyword TOUGH for the duration of a single battle. It cannot be given 
to Lions of Jabir, Brazen Bulls or Homunculi. 
CONSUMABLE, LIMIT: 1 


Fire Shield 
20 ducats 
An Invention of the al-Jazari school of engineering within the House of Wisdom, this shield is treated with an Alchemical 
formula, making it highly resistant to fire weapons. It has proven its value in many desperate battles against the flame- 
wielding Heretics. 


Rules: Always takes one hand to use in both melee and in ranged combat. Grants -1 to all injury rolls against the 
model. This bonus stacks with any armour the model wears, unless otherwise indicated. Any attack against this model 
that has the Keyword FIRE will suffer -1 DICE on injury rolls and will not cause an additional BLOOD MARKER. 
LIMIT: 2 


59 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


60 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


The Principality of 
New Antioch 


or three hundred years the Principality of 
New Antioch has stood defiantly as the focal 
point of the Church and the Faithful at the 
very edge of the shadow cast by the Gate 
of Hell. It is the Home of All Our Hopes, 
the bulwark against Heretic forces and the first line of 
defence against the devil’s might. Should New Antioch 
fall, the Levant will be lost and the path to heartlands of 
the Church will be wide open. 
War has never left this corner of the world. The ancient 
city of Antioch was destroyed by a mysterious demonic 
weapon in the year 1545, but the Faithful never gave up 
their positions in the ruins. Despite the lethal demonic 
essence emanating from the crater that was left behind, 
the garrison held on, even as mighty Constantinople fell 
to the legions of Kimaris, Marquis of Hell. 
Before it was destroyed, the ancient city of Antioch 
was always the first line of defence to be put to test. 
Thus it is no wonder that in the year 1559 the Sword 
Congress of Vienna agreed to rebuild and fortify the 
city, and that a yearly tithe is to be sent to New Antioch 
by all the Faithful nations, though this levy is rarely in 
form of coin. Instead, endless supply trains of foodstuffs, 
tools, ammunition, weaponry, machinery and skilled 
workers and engineers come from across Europa and the 
Mediterranean Sea, as well as the African dominions. 
Since those days New Antioch has grown to be the 
most important fortress-city in the world, the Sword 
and the Shield of Europa and Africa. All the princes of 
the Church and heads of the various states and domains 
who oppose Hell understand that it is better to fight 
their battles against the Heretics as far away from their 
heartlands as possible. To this day New Antioch has 
withstood eight great sieges and its famed walls, with 
their seventy-seven mighty towers, have never been 
breached. This is partly due to hundreds of anchorites, 
metallic battle shrines with devotees entombed within 
them, that are embedded into the walls, keeping a 
vigilant watch over the walls day and night. 
More than anything else, it is the volunteers who 
come to serve under the Banner of Christ that ensure 


the continuous existence of the Principality. Thus in the 
streets of the city one can hear hundreds of languages 
and dialects. One might observe hussars of the Polish- 
Lithuanian commonwealth brushing shoulders with 
the last remnants of the Varangian Guard, or hear the 
sermons of a street preacher from Eire extolling the 
soldiery of Ethiopia to lay down their lives for the holy 
cause. Perhaps they might even witness the Church 
Engineers procession taking their latest invention to be 
tested in the front lines. 
As the nominal supreme commander of all the 
Faithful armed forces, the Duke of New Antioch is a title 
of unrivalled prestige and honour. But despite swearing 
fealty to the Duke, in reality most of the troops from 
across all of Christendom who come to do battle against 
Hell operate in units of their own, taking commands 
from their leaders and making their own strategic 
decisions. 
Still, some soldiers do indeed renounce their 
citizenship and take up the cross, and come to serve 
under Duke Constantine alone. Thus the standing army 
of the Principality is the greatest single fighting force the 
Faithful can muster, and those who serve on the walls of 
the Home of Hopes are rightfully proud of their livery. 
In recent years the Duke has despatched small forces 
into No Man’s Land to gather intelligence, look for 
artefacts of power, conduct raids on Heretic forces, 
secure strategic strongpoints and loot the battlefields 
for the wealth of coin and weaponry scattered across 
the tortured landscape that stretches between New 
Antioch and the Heretic domains over the centuries. 
These warbands are simply given commission by the 
Duke, and have to raise their own coin and muster 
their own forces. However, holy relics, great wealth 
and fame across all the Christendom ensures that there 
is a steady supply of ambitious leaders who are willing 
to risk all in the crucible of war. Competition for loot, 
supplies, artefacts and information is fierce, and these 
warbands often come to blows, not just with Heretical 
forces, but with competing rivals and crazed Trench 
Pilgrims. 


F 


OATH OF NEW ANTIOCH 


“I swear to serve faithfully, loyally 


and honourably the reigning Duke 


and Duchess of New Antioch, 


and their legitimate successors, to 


devote myself to them with all my 


strength, sacrificing even my life in 


their defence. 


I assume the same duties towards 


the Princes of the Church and the 


city of New Antioch itself, for she 


is the Home of All Our Hopes. I 


shall make war against the Heretics 


without cessation and without 


mercy. 


I also promise my Commander 


and the other Superiors respect, fi- 


delity and obedience. Thus I swear, 


may God and our Holy Patrons 


assist me.” 


Response of the guards to the Flag 


of New Antioch; 


“I swear to faithfully, loyally and 


honourably observe all that is read 


to me at this time. May God and 


our Holy Patrons assist me!” 


61 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Creation 


You have 700 ducats to recruit your initial Force in the 
campaign. For one-off battles, we suggest a typical force of 
900 ducats and 8 Glory Points. 


New Antioch 
Equipment List 


New Antioch forces can be equipped with the following 
weapons, armour and equipment. All exceptions are 
clearly listed here on the entries for each warrior. 


Ranged Weapons 
Bolt Action Rifle 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Semi-automatic Rifle 
15 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Automatic Rifle 
40 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
Bayonet Lug) 
Pistol 
6 ducats 
Automatic Pistol 
20 ducats (ELITE 
only, LIMIT: 3) 
Submachine gun 
30 ducats (LIMIT: 2, 
Bayonet Lug, Shield 
Combo) 
Shotgun 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug, 
Shield Combo) 
Automatic Shotgun 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 2, 
Bayonet Lug, Shield 
Combo) 
Heavy Shotgun 
20 ducats (LIMIT: 2, 
Shield Combo) 
Sniper Rifle 
35 ducats (LIMIT: 3) 
Grenade Launcher 
30 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Grenades 
7 ducats 
Incendiary Grenades 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Machine Gun 
50 ducats (LIMIT: 2) 
Flamethrower 
30 ducats (LIMIT: 3) 
Heavy Flamethrower 
55 ducats (LIMIT: 1) 
Satchel Charge 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 3, 
CONSUMABLE, one per 
model) 


Melee Weapons 
Trench Knife 
1 ducat 
Bayonet 
2 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Trench Club 
3 ducats 
Sword/Axe 
4 ducats 
Polearm 
7 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Great Hammer/Maul 
10 ducats 
Great Sword/Axe 
12 ducats 
Misericordia 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
Combat Medic only) 


Armour 
Standard Armour 
15 ducats 
Reinforced Armour 
40 ducats (ELITE & 
Mechanized Heavy 
Infantry only) 
Machine Armour 
50 ducats (ELITE only, 
LIMIT: 1 excluding 
Mechanised Heavy 
Infantry) 
Engineer Body Armour 
45 ducats (Combat 
Engineer only) 
Trench Shield 
15 ducats 


Equipment 
Combat Helmet 
5 ducats 
Gas Mask 
5 ducats 
Shovel 
5 ducats 
Medi-Kit 
5 ducats 
Musician’s instrument 
15 ducats (LIMIT: 1, 
Non-ELITE only) 
Martyrdom Pills 
1 Glory Point 
(Consumable, ELITE 
Only, LIMIT: 2) 
Troop Flag 
1 Glory Point 
(LIMIT: 1) 
Field Shrine 
2 Glory Points 
Mountaineer Kit 
3 ducats (LIMIT: 4) 
Binoculars 
10 ducats 
(ELITE only) 


New Antioch Fireteams 


Your warband may have up to two Fireteams. These 
Fireteams may consist of any two models from your 
warband. Models in Fireteams gain the Keyword 
FIRETEAM. Fireteams gain the Concentrated Attack 
rule: 


; FIRETEAM: This model is part of a FIRETEAM 
made up of two models. All models that are part of 
the same FIRETEAM can be activated at the same 
time without the opponent getting their turn in 
between and can take their ACTIONS in any order 
they wish, switching between the two models. 
Note that if the Activation of either member of the 
FIRETEAM forcefully ends (due to a failed RISKY 
ACTION for example), it ends both Activations. 
Allies cannot be part of a FIRETEAM. 
; Concentrated Attack: If a model in the 
FIRETEAM makes any kind of Attack ACTION 
(ranged or melee) against an opponent, where the 
other member of their FIRETEAM has already hit it 
with an attack ACTION during the same activation, 
the cost of a Bloodbath is reduced to three BLOOD 
MARKERS against this opponent, whether the model 
is standing or Down. 


62 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Elite: The officer corps 


1 Lieutenant 
(Cost: 70 Ducats) 


Your warband must include a Lieutenant when it is created. 


Lieutenants are leaders of small squads or platoons of New Antioch’s soldiers, playing a 
fundamental role on the distant frontlines of the Trench Crusade, displaying unwavering 
resolve in preserving the unity and morale of their troops. Lieutenants might be the 
favoured son or daughter of a noble family or gained their rank by impressing their 
superiors with their exceptional strategic acumen and audacious bravery. 


In addition to their command role, they are also responsible for acquiring new weapons, 
arms, equipment and food for their troops. All too often this requires looting the battlefields 
of No Man’s Land or even raiding settlements, since resupply can be sporadic at best. 


Having rightfully earned their position, Lieutenants enjoy the privilege of selecting their 
preferred arms and armour, often with the pick of the rarest battlefield finds. It is not 
uncommon for a Lieutenant to wield a distinctive weapon, perhaps a family heirloom, an 
idiosyncratic affectation or an ostentatious piece providing some much-needed swagger. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Lieutenant 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Lieutenant can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the 
New Antioch Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Tough: To survive for any length in the Trenches, any officer of the New 
Antioch is chosen from amongst the toughest soldiers. They are subject to the rules 
for TOUGH creatures. 
; On my command!: Once per Turn, as an ACTION the Lieutenant can instead 
force the opponent to activate one of their models that the Lieutenant can select 
from amongst the models they can see. This ends the Activation of the Lieutenant. 


Keywords 
ELITE, NEW ANTIOCH, TOUGH 


63 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Trench Cleric 
(Cost: 60 Ducats) 


A holy warrior who looks after the souls of the soldiers in the company, the cleric chants 
inspiring battle prayers and can perform various miracles such as healing or even smiting 
the enemy. A cleric often carries a portable shrine on his back to denote his faith in the 
company’s Patron, be that one of the Saints of their homeland, a mighty Arch-Angel or the 
Lord himself. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Trench Cleric 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
A Cleric can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the New 
Antioch Armoury. 


Abilities 
You can choose one of the following: 


; God is With Us!: Select one friendly model within 6” of the Priest (including 
the Priest) and take a RISKY ACTION. If successful, the model immediately gains 
a BLESSING MARKER. 
; Onwards, Christian Soldiers!: All friendly models that are within 8” of the 
Trench Cleric at the start of their Activation are not affected by FEAR. 


Keywords 
ELITE, NEW ANTIOCH 


0-2 Sniper Priests 
(Cost: 50 Ducats) 


These devotees of the Church blind themselves ritually as a devotion to God and use only 
their faith to strike the enemies of the Church. During the Siege of St. Lux stories were told 
of a sniper priest killing a target three miles away. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Sniper Priest 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
A Sniper Priest can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the 
New Antioch Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Aim: A Sniper Priest may take a RISKY ACTION to aim. If successful then the 
Priest may add +2 DICE to any Ranged attack rolls during this same Activation. 
; Absolute Faith: Sniper Priests do not use their eyesight to aim at their enemies. 
The opponent cannot apply any BLOOD MARKERs when they use a Ranged 
weapon. They still suffer penalties for Range and Cover as standard. 


Keywords 
ELITE, NEW ANTIOCH 


64 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Troopers: The Soldiery of New Antioch 


Yeoman 
(Cost: 30 ducats +10 ducats for 
mandatory Bolt Action Rifle) 


A basic trooper of New Antioch. Brave men and women who have received standard 
training and sworn an oath to the Duke of New Antioch. What they lack in combat skills 
compared to more elite troops they more than make up with their numbers and wide 
selection of weapons available to them. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Yeoman 
6”/Infantry 0 Dice 
0 Dice 
0 
25mm 
Trench Mole 
6”/Infantry 0 Dice 
0 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
Each yeoman is equipped with a bolt action rifle. You can swap this rifle for another 
ranged weapon of lower, equal or greater cost. If the cost is greater, you must pay the 
difference in ducats. 


Yeomen can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the New 
Antioch Armoury. At the cost of +10 ducats per model, up to two yeomen can be 
upgraded to Trench Moles (up to three in warbands of over 1000 ducats value), scouts 
who make use of tunnels that criss-cross No Man’s Land. They gain the Keyword 
INFILTRATOR. 


Keywords 
NEW ANTIOCH, INFILTRATOR (Trench Moles only) 


0-5 Shocktroopers 
(Cost: 45 Ducats) 


Assault Troops that specialise in attacking enemy defensive positions. They are masters of 
rapid assault and melee combat. Experts at combined arms and Fireteam tactics. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Shocktrooper 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
A Shocktrooper can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the 
New Antioch Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Shock Charge: When a Shocktrooper charges, roll 2D6 instead of 1D6 
and then add the highest of the two dice to their charge move. 
; Assault Drill: Shocktroopers ignore the effects of Keyword HEAVY 
on Melee weapons. The Shocktrooper can still only carry a single HEAVY 
item, unless they are STRONG. 


Keywords 
NEW ANTIOCH 


65 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-2 Combat Engineers 
(Cost: 80 Ducats) 


The combat engineers specialise in destroying bunkers, discovering minefields and building 
battlefield emplacements. Casualties are extremely high in the combat engineer units, but 
they consider it an honour to fight and die for New Antioch and the Church. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Engineer 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+0 Dice 
-2 
25mm 


Equipment 
Combat Engineers are equipped with a Shovel and Engineer Body Armour. This 
equipment and armour can never be removed. A Combat Engineer can be equipped 
with any weapon or equipment from the New Antioch Armoury. 


; Engineer Body Armour: Grants a -2 modifier to injury rolls made against 
the Combat Engineer (this is included in the Combat Engineer’s profile). All 
weapons with keyword SHRAPNEL suffer -1 DICE on all injury rolls against the 
Combat Engineer and SHRAPNEL attacks do not cause extra BLOOD MARKERS 
on a model wearing this suit. The effects relating to SHRAPNEL work even against 
attacks that ignore armour. 


Abilities 


; Battlefield Demolition: The Engineer ignores HEAVY rules for Satchel 
Charges. 
; Fortify: During their Activation, an Engineer can take a RISKY ACTION with 
+1 DICE. If successful, the engineer is considered to be in Cover until the model 
moves. This ACTION cannot be used if the model is in Melee combat. 
; De-mine: As a RISKY ACTION the Engineer can disable any mine or trapped 
terrain they move in contact with. If they fail, the mine blows up as described in 
applicable rules. 


Keywords 
NEW ANTIOCH 


0-3 Mechanized Heavy Infantry 
(Cost: 85 Ducats) 


Well-armoured, large soldiers who wield the heavy weaponry of the company. They are 
selected from amongst the best and given heavy chemical enhancements. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Heavy Infantry 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+0 Dice 
-2 
32/40mm 


Equipment 
Mechanized Heavy Infantry always wear Light Machine Armour which counts as 
Reinforced Armour (32mm Base). This is reflected in the cost and profile above. This can 
be upgraded to Machine Armour (despite not being ELITE and LIMIT: 1) for +10 
Ducats (40mm Base). They can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment 
from the New Antioch Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Strong: The Mechanized Heavy Infantry ignores the effect of the Keyword 
HEAVY on any weapon they wield. 


Keywords 
NEW ANTIOCH, STRONG 


66 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Combat Medic 
(Cost: 65 Gold Ducats) 


The Sisters of St. Cosmas are a highly trained elite medical corps, specialising in battlefield 
first aid and surgeries on the front lines of the Great War. 


The Sisters take a modified Hippocratic Oath that compels them to help any wounded 
soldiers of the Faith, no matter how dire the circumstance, as well as dispatching heretics 
and other enemies they find on the battlefield without pity or mercy. 


Armed with a combat surgical knife that doubles as a Misericordia, they are as equally 
adept at saving lives as taking them from those they find lying wounded in No Man’s 
Land. They carry medical kits with a plethora of battlefield drugs that are especially useful 
for nullifying the pain of even the ghastliest wounds, and getting soldiers back on their feet 
and back into the fray, even if just for a few moments so they can accomplish their mission 
or die trying. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Medic 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+0 Dice 
-1 
25mm 


Equipment 
The medic carries a Misericordia and a Medi-kit. They wear a gas mask and suit of 
standard armour (reflected on the profile above). 


You cannot modify the equipment, armour and weapons of the medic in any way. 


Abilities 


; Finish the Fallen: Due their knowledge of anatomy and physiology, medics are 
experts at inflicting debilitating injuries and excruciating pain. Unless the target 
has the Keyword DEMONIC or BLACK GRAIL, add +1 BONUS DICE to any 
injury rolls the medic makes in melee against opponents who are Down. 
; Expert Medic: Medic adds +1 BONUS DICE whenever they use their Medi- 
Kit to aid friendly models. 
; Convent Conditioning: The medic is immune to FEAR. 


Keywords 
NEW ANTIOCH 


67 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: Papal 
States Intervention Force 


The Papal states who all operate under the command 
of the Supreme Pontiff of Rome rather than the Duke 
of New Antioch are sometimes dispatched to the front 
lines to perform a specific duty such as hunting down 
and eliminating dangerous Heretic leaders or recovering 
artefacts of great spiritual importance. 
These Warbands are typically quite small but have access 
to extremely elite soldiers and specialist equipment. They 
are led by utterly devoted warrior-monks and priests 
hand-picked by the Pope. 


Rules 
The Papal States Intervention Force has the following 
special rules: 


; Specialist Force: A Papal States Intervention 
Force is recruited with 500 ducats and 11 Glory 
Points when creating a warband for a campaign. 
When recruiting a warband for a one-off battle, we 
recommend using 700 ducats and 15 Glory Points. 
; Swiss Guard: Up to four non-ELITE troopers 
can be upgraded into Swiss Guards at the cost of 5 
ducats each. They are immune to FEAR. 
; Supreme Blessing: One model in the warband 
may carry the crucifix given by the Supreme Pontiff. 
This model can take further ACTIONS if it fails in an 
attempted RISKY ACTION. Note that the action 
fails, but you are allowed to try any other ACTIONS 
on your profile without losing the Activation. 
; Far from home: The Papal Intervention Force 
may have no Trench Moles. 
; Vatican’s representative: Papal States Warband 
must include a Trench Cleric but does not have to 
include a Lieutenant. 


Warband Variant: Eire 
Rangers 


Eire is a stronghold of the Church and an ancient centre 
of learning. Due to the constant and devastating raids of 
the Heretic Navy, they are bitter enemies of the Infernal 
forces. The Emerald Isle has endured hunger and ravaged 
by the Black Grail, as well as a full-fledged invasion 
aimed at destroying the famed House of Manuscripts 
where many of the holiest of texts are kept. After this 
century of ruthless battles and brutal guerrilla warfare 
against the invaders, the warriors of Eire are now masters 
of skirmish fighting, hit-and-run tactics and ambushes. 
Elite Fianna warrior-hunters are especially adept at 


these guerrilla tactics: they uphold the ancient tradition 
of a band of roving warriors living off the land. While 
seen as trouble-makers and godless hellraisers, they 
are nevertheless expert skirmishers, and easily find 
employment in the warbands who take the Cross and 
travel to New Antioch to strike back at the enemy. These 
warriors adorn themselves with grisly trophies in the 
manner of their pagan ancestors, carrying skulls of the 
vanquished – much to the irritation of the Church. 


Due to the ravages of the wars, the island nation has few 
resources for heavy armour or most intricate automatic 
weapons, but they more than make up for this with their 
skilled light infantry and knowledge of the lay of the land. 
So when the Poet-King Tadhg O’Connor dispatches his 
famed Rangers to aid the Principality of New Antioch 
instead of paying the yearly tithe of Vienna, the Duke is 
more than happy to accept these fierce warriors instead. 


A rare latent Berserker trait runs in a few warrior 
bloodlines of Eire. It can be made to manifest with the 
Chemical Communion of the blood of the Meta-Christ. 
Such fighters enter a state of battle-rage, where no bullet 
or blade seems to cause them any harm. 


Rules 
The Eire Rangers has the following special rules: 


; Fianna: Any Shocktroopers in an Eire Warband 
can be made a member of Fianna, the famed 
warrior-hunters. They cost +10 ducats each and have 
the Keywords SKIRMISHER and INFILTRATOR. 
; Carnyx: Your army can purchase a special 
Carnyx instead of a generic musical instrument. This 
horn is identical to a musical instrument (including 
equipment restrictions and LIMIT), except it can be 
carried by an ELITE model and the model carrying 
it causes FEAR. 
; Hit-and-run tactics: If a model of this warband 
uses the Retreat ACTION to move away from 
Combat, enemies have a -1 DICE penalty to hit 
rolls with their free attack. 
; Berserker: Either your Lieutenant or one of the 
Fianna can be a Berserker. This model is immune to 
FEAR and disregards any BLOOD MARKERS from 
any source. Berserkers never wear armour, though 
they can carry a Trench Shield. Add +15 Ducats to 
the cost of this model. 
; Strong in faith: Eire is a bastion of the Church, 
with many famed warrior-priests who travel to war. 
The warband may have up to two Trench Clerics 
and they can each choose to replace their Onwards, 
Christian Soldiers! ability with one from the list 
below. 
; Loose organisation: Your warband may only 
have up to one FIRETEAM from the New Antioch 
Fireteams feature. Additionally, your Lieutenant 
loses the On my command! ability and gains the 


68 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Keyword SKIRMISHER. 
; Light Infantry: The warband is allowed to 
field only one Mechanized Heavy Infantry trooper. 
No model (save for the single Mechanized Heavy 
Infantry) may carry a HEAVY weapon or wear Heavy 
or Machine Armour. This does not apply to Combat 
Engineers’ Satchel Charges. 
; Followers of St. Patrick: If playing a Campaign, 
the patron of the warband is automatically Saint 
Patrick. 


Eire Trench Cleric Abilities 


; Away, Serpents! Select any enemy within 12” 
of the Priest and take a RISKY ACTION (targeting 
models on 40mm or larger bases incur -1 DICE 
penalty to this roll). If successful, the enemy model 
goes Down immediately, slithering on its belly like 
a snake. 
; Arise and be Healed! Select one friendly model 
within 3” of the Priest and take a RISKY ACTION. 
If successful, the warrior immediately stands up if 
Down, and loses up to D3 BLOOD MARKERS or 
INFECTION MARKERS (or any combination) of 
your choice. 


Warband Variant: 
Stoßtruppen of the Free 
State of Prussia 


When the need to take out an enemy strongpoint or 
assault an especially powerful defensive line of trenches 
or redoubts arises, the Duke of Antioch often calls 
upon the famed Stoßtruppen forces of the Free State of 
Prussia. These elite units often operate in deep forward 
positions, and quite often they carry secret orders or 
specific missions from the Princes of the Church or the 
New Antioch High Command. 


The Free State Shocktroopers are selected and trained 
specifically to perform lightning assaults, master the 
firearms of close assault, and operate in Fireteams that 
are perfectly synchronised in their combined arms 
tactics. Admittance to this elite group is strictly by merit. 
All members must be decorated athletes, under 25 years 
of age, unmarried and must have demonstrated a high 
level of aggression on the battlefield. Of all the soldiers 
serving Prussia, Stoßtruppen have by far the highest 
casualty rate. When inducted into the ranks, all swear an 
oath at the Köningsber Cathedral: “To each, his own, to 
me, death”. 


Rules 
The Stoßtrupp of the Free State of Prussia warband has 
the following special rules: 


; Expert Fireteams: You may have up to three 
FIRETEAMS from the New Antioch Fireteams 
feature. 
; Masters of the Grenade: Models of the 
Stoßtruppen Warband add 4” range to all of their 
GRENADE weapons. 
; Forward Positions: Up to two Shocktroops can 
have the Keyword INFILTRATOR at the cost of 
+10 ducats per model. 
; Rapid Assault: At the cost of +5 ducats per 
model, any Shocktroopers and Lieutenants may add 
+1 DICE to all their Dash ACTIONS. 
; Specialised Equipment: This warband has 
LIMIT:4 for Submachine guns. Automatic 
Shotguns and Automatic Pistols are not limited 
to ELITE. The warband may have no Grenade 
Launchers and only one Machine Gun. 
; Troop Selection: The warband must have at 
least two shocktroopers and can have up to eight. 
the warband can have only one mechanised heavy 
infantry, one sniper priest and no trench moles. 
; Lightly-armoured: Apart from mechanised 
heavy infantry and the lieutenant, no model in 
the warband can be equipped with reinforced or 
machine armour. 
; Light Melee: Prussian shocktroopers lose the 
Assault Drill ability. 


Warband Variant: 
Kingdom of Alba Assault 
Detachment 


Hailing from the Scottish Highlands where the Church 
is strong, these men (and a few fierce women!) come to 
New Antioch in search of glory, forgiveness of their sins, 
as well as dreams of acquiring valuable loot to send back 
to their island home, but above all to get their hands on 
some Devil-worshippers! 


The Heretic submarine fleet harries the shores of the 
Kingdom constantly, carrying off their young in chains 
to be sacrificed in the dark altars of the Arch-devils and 
their hatred towards Hell’s forces runs deep. The fleet 
of Britain and their famed moving fortress are reserved 
in guarding their own shores, causing friction and 
resentment among their northern neighbours, whose 
coastal defences are far less comprehensive. As is the 
tradition in Alba, these warbands favour close quarters 
combat and fierce charges over defence and long-range 
attacks. 


69 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Lochaber axe 
15 ducats each 
Tuagh-chatha axes combine the power of the Great Axe with the defensive qualities of a polearm. Its wicked spike has 
stopped many a Heretic in their tracks. The Dùn Èideann Guard are especially adept at their use. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Lochaber Axe 
2-handed 
Melee 
+1 to injury rolls 
HEAVY, CRITICAL, 
CUMBERSOME 


Rules: All injuries are rolled with +1 added to the result (i.e. a roll of 7 on the Injury Chart becomes 8). Models 
equipped with a Lochaber Axe impose a -1 DICE to hit penalty on any charging enemies in Melee combat. This 
only applies when a charging model attacks, not in subsequent rounds of Melee. 


Rules 
The Kingdom of Alba Assault Detachment has the 
following special rules: 


; Rampant Charge: All models in this warband 
ignore the penalty for Defended Obstacles. 
; Melee-focused: Mechanized Heavy Infantry 
of this warband have +1 DICE in melee instead of 
Ranged Attacks. 
; Highland Machine Armour: Models in this 
warband equipped with machine armour ignore the 
penalty to charging imposed by the armour. 
; Highland Strength: The Lieutenant of the 
warband has the Keyword STRONG. 
; Strained Supply: This warband has LIMIT:1 
for Grenade Launchers, Submachine Guns, Machine 
Guns, Automatic Shotguns and Sniper Rifles. 
; Bagpipes: Your warband can purchase special 
bagpipes instead of a generic musical instrument. 
These bagpipes are identical to a musical instrument 
(including their equipment restrictions and LIMIT), 
but friendly models within 4” of the model carrying 
them are immune to FEAR. 
; Brave: The warband adds +1 DICE to all 
Morale Tests. 
; Claymore Smiths: An Alba Warband can buy 
Great Swords for 7 ducats instead of usual 12 ducats. 
; Lightly-armoured: Apart from mechanized 
heavy infantry and the lieutenant, no model in 
the warband can be equipped with reinforced or 
machine armour. 


70 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: 
Expeditionary Forces of 
Abyssinia 


Most of what was once the ancient realm of Egypt now 
rests under the Shadow of Hell and the stronghold 
of the servants of the Prince of Greed, who has long 
dreamed of plundering the whole continent of its riches. 
Beautiful Alexandria and even mighty Cairo have fallen, 
their ports serving as anchorage for the heretic fleet and 
mustering grounds for Hell’s legions as they strike south 
and west. 


But thus far, Mammon’s plans to sweep across the 
northern coast of Africa all the way to Mali and Axum 
has been frustrated. For this front is every bit as bitterly 
contested as the European theatre of war. Here the 
heretic legions are opposed by a coalition of Nubia, 
Numidia and the Solomonic Empire of Abyssinia 
(more commonly known as the Ethiopian Empire in 
Africa) that have thrown their lot together to resist 
the invader. Blood stains the waters of the Nile as the 
coalition struggles to contain the grinding offensives of 
Mammon’s Legion of the Ten Golden Horns. The plan 
of the Prince of Greed is two-fold: to overcome the holy 
churches of Lalibela – desecrating and auctioning off 
the legendary relics within the churches and cathedrals 
of Axum – and to claim the fabled gold mines of the 
Queen of Sheba for himself, which he covets beyond any 
other treasure trove on Earth. 


War has honed the soldiers of Ethiopia into masters 
of mobile warfare and taking the enemy on in loose 
formation, a style of fighting well-suited to their rugged 
country where scarce roads restrict the movements of 
large armies. Most levies fight armed with rifles, seeking 
to close in on the enemy to ensure the effectiveness of 
their volleys; while the Chewa are the warrior-elite, 
trained in hand-to-hand combat since childhood. 
They are encouraged to take on lions and other fierce 
predators as part of their upbringing, and warriors that 
have taken down a male lion single-handedly have the 
honour of wearing its mane as a headdress. Their famed 
war cry “Together! Together!” is often the last thing the 
invaders hear. 


Claiming a direct lineage from the legendary queen of 
Sheba and King Solomon, the Emperors of Abyssinia 
are staunch members of the Faithful alliance, and the 
representative of the African continent in the Sword 
Congress of Vienna. It is a matter of pride and prestige 
to the House of Solomon that the tithe to New Antioch 
is met punctually. So once in seven years the Negarit war 
drums sound the kitet, the call to arms. The volunteers 
gather at Axum, the spiritual capital of the nation, where 
the Ark of the Covenant is said to be kept under the 


watchful eyes of warrior monks who are born to their 
role and never leave their post. 


There is never any lack of warriors willing to join the 
expeditionary force to aid New Antioch. Adventure, 
unrivalled status given to those who go to serve the Duke 
and the chance to fight the enemy in their heartlands 
ensures that the bravest young soldiers compete for the 
chance to join the expeditionary force. 


Before being accepted into this force, all volunteers 
to New Antioch must make a pilgrimage to Abuna 
Yemata Guh, the chapel that rests on a mountainside 
at a dizzying height of some 8500 feet. It is the 
most inaccessible place of worship in the world, and 
volunteers must travel to receive the blessing from this 
shrine in the sky carrying their full military kit and gear. 
Miraculously, there have been exceedingly few deaths 
caused by soldiers losing their footing and plummeting 
to their deaths. Each one of those who have fallen have 
been found to be a heretic infiltrator, and their broken 
and rotting bodies are left unburied as a warning to those 
traitors who would defile the sanctity of the shrine. 


Once the pilgrimage is done, the forces assemble and 
are laden with gold, silver, precious stones, icons and 
holy relics as gifts from the Emperor to the Duke. The 
warriors of the Emperor march to the hidden ports of 
the coast that are still free of the enemy. There is no 
land route for the warriors of Ethiopia to reach the 
Principality and the Heretic Fleet dominates both the 
Erythraean Sea and the Red Sea, leaving the perilous 
crossing of the mediterranean as the only viable option. 


Thus there is the war on the waves of the Mediterranean 
as the Faithful fleet clashes with heretic dreadnoughts. 
Ships will be sunk and the gold from the mines of the 
Queen of Sheba is lost to the sea, but when the songs 
and drums of the warriors of Solomonic Throne can be 
heard in the harbour and echoing on the famed walls of 
New Antioch, the citizens know that aid has come once 
more. 


Fewer than one in ten volunteers ever return to the 
rock-hewn Churches of Lalibela to give thanks for their 
deliverance. The rest give their lives in brutal battles in 
No Man’s Land, like countless millions before them. In 
the eyes of these survivors one can catch a glimpse of the 
horrors that have scarred them for life. 


71 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Rules 
The Expeditionary Force of Abyssinia has the following 
special rules: 


; Chewa: Any shocktroopers or ELITE models 
in an Abyssinian warband can be made a member of 
Chewa, the traditional warrior-elite. This costs +5 
ducats per model and can be done after the model 
has been recruited. These models gain +1 DICE 
against enemies that are in melee combat with a 
model other than the Chewa. If this enemy is in 
melee with 2+ other models, this bonus is increased 
to +2 DICE. 
; Faith of Ethiopia: The sect of the Sniper Priests 
does not operate in the Solomonic Dynasty, so your 
warband cannot contain any Sniper Priests. 
; Flanking Forces: The warband cannot have 
Trench Moles, but instead you can upgrade up to 
four Yeomen to Vanguards at the cost of +5 ducats 
each. They have the following special rules: Unless 
the scenario prohibits use of the special deployment 
of INFILTRATORS, you may deploy the Vanguard 
on any table edge as long as they are at least 8” away 
from any enemy model after INFILTRATORS are 
deployed. Vanguard can also be deployed in your 
own deployment zone as standard. 
; Short-Range Marksmanship: Yeomen, 
Vanguard and the Lieutenant in this warband gain 
+1 DICE to all hit rolls if they are using their 
ranged weapons at short range (i.e. half or less of 
their maximum range). This bonus does not apply to 
GRENADES or weapons with the Keyword HEAVY. 
; Abyssinian Healers: Your warband can have up 
to two Combat Medics. 
; Holy Warriors: The warband may include 
up to two Holy Warriors (use Trench Cleric 
characteristics) and they can each choose to replace 
their “Onwards, Christian Soldiers!” ability with 
one from the Abyssinian Holy Warrior abilities list 
below. 
; Chieftain Panoply: The Mechanized Infantry 
of the warband cannot be upgraded to use Machine 
Armour. 
; Weapons of Mobile Warfare: Your warband can 
have a maximum of three ranged weapons with the 
Keyword HEAVY. This limitation does not include 
satchel charges. 


Abyssinian Holy Warrior Abilities 


; Blessed Psalm: As an ACTION, the Warrior 
removes one BLESSING MARKER it has and adds it 
to any other member of the warband. This ACTION 
succeeds automatically. 
; God’s Mercy: Select one friendly model within 
3” of the warrior and take an ACTION. If successful, 
the target immediately stands if Down and loses up 
to one BLOOD MARKER or INFECTION MARKER 
(your choice) it has. 


72 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Abyssinian Special Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Abyssinian Warband. 


Shotel 
5 ducats 
Since the days of ancient Axum, the Shotel has been the weapon of choice for the Abyssinian warrior-elite. Its curved blade 
is designed to reach around an opponent’s shield and stab them in vital areas, such as the kidneys or lungs. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Shotel 
1-handed 
Melee 
Ignore shield 
CRITICAL 


Rules: The Shotel is specifically designed to overcome enemy shields. It ignores the target’s penalty to injury rolls 
from its shield, if any. The Holy Icon Shield and similar effects still apply. 


Chewa or ELITE only. 


Holy Water of Lalibela 
3 ducats 
Vials of holy water from the rock-hewn Churches of Lalibela are carried by the Ethiopian warriors on their campaigns. It 
has great power over demonic entities and aids in healing. 


Rules: This model gains +1 DICE on any ACTION that would remove one or more BLOOD MARKERS or 
INFECTION MARKERS if successful. 


CONSUMABLE, LIMIT: 4 


Anfarro (Warrior’s Crown) 
10 ducats 
An Anfarro is made from a ring of lion’s mane hair, held in a filigree gilt metal coronet studded with blue and red 
gemstones. It is granted by the Emperor to an aristocratic warrior and lion hunter as a token of honour and bravery. 


Rules: This model’s Melee characteristic is improved by +1 DICE (as only the best warriors are granted the honour 
of wearing an Anfarro). This model is also immune to FEAR. Note that the Anfarro cannot be worn together with a 
helmet. 


Headgear, ELITE only or Chewa only. LIMIT: 6 


Tabot 
4 Glory Points 
Made from alabaster, marble or wood from an acacia tree, these are blessed replicas of the Ark of the Covenant. A priest 
that accompanies the forces of the King of Kings to New Antioch, they will take the holy Tabot with them, wrapped in silk 
cloth decorated with gold string. Its miraculous powers reward those who perform virtuous deeds on the battlefield. 


Rules: Each time an ACTION is taken by any model of your warband that heals one or more BLOOD MARKERS or 
INFECTION MARKERS, the model carrying the Tabot gains one BLESSING MARKER. 


Abyssinian Holy Warrior only. LIMIT: 1 


73 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


74 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


The Cult of the 
Black Grail 


pidemics of typhus, malaria, typhoid, 
smallpox, yellow-fever, pneumonia, trench 
fever, Markisian disease and countless 
others ravage the trenches and battlefields 
of the Great War, but they all pale in 
comparison to the most dreaded of them all: the Black 
Grail. 
Beelzebub, Lord of the Flies, stands apart from the 
other lords of Hell, who act mainly through their mortal 
followers. Instead, when he periodically gains supremacy 
in the bitter power struggles of the archfiends, he sends 
forth his deadliest curse. 
Infused with demonic essence from the bowels of 
the seventh layer of Hell, where the putrid fortress of 
Beelzebub stands, spews forth a torrent of demonic 
hell-flies, scorpions, locusts and other infernal insects. 
The Hellgate opens and a veritable tidal wave of foulness 
emerges, flowing across the land at startling speed, 
consuming everything and leaving indescribable horror 
in its wake. After nine days the insect swarm exhausts 
itself, devouring its own in its insatiable hunger. 
The Black Grail is indiscriminate in its hatred of 
all living things: its infections can spread to virtually 
any living biological matter, which bursts forth with 
tumours, boils and weeping pustules. Puddles and ponds 
of melted flesh are left in its wake, endless mouths left 
screaming in their agony, for the Black Grail destroys 
the body but leaves the mind intact to suffer. The 
Scientist-Priests of the Church and the Alchemists 
of the Sultanate fervently look for a way to inoculate 
their people against this foulest of diseases, but thus 
far they are without success. The only answer is to burn 
the infected settlements with specially-constructed 
flamethrower tanks that use holy anointing oil as the fuel 
for their weapons. 
But if this is not done, or the countermeasures are too 
late, what happens next is even worse: bodies of men, 
horses, dogs, insects and other animals of every kind that 
are infected by the Black Grail lurch to their feet, driven 
by a demonic will. Not living, not dead, they become 
vessels to spread the corruption of their master ever 


further, forming warbands that strive to find and infect 
life of any kind. They also gather things that mortals 
value and bring this loot as well as grisly trophies to the 
feet of the idols of Beelzebub they erect. Thus the Cult 
of the Black Grail mocks the devotions of the Faithful 
and their prayers. 
At the head of such warbands stand the knights of the 
Order of the Fly: those most depraved men and women 
who willingly embrace the Black Grail and whose 
devotion Beelzebub finds sufficient. They are granted 
weapons, armour and equipment corrupted by the hand 
of the Archfiend in exchange for sacrifices brought to 
the altars of Beelzebub, which these warbands build 
wherever they go, objects of grisly horror constructed 
from the remains of their victims shaped into the form 
of monstrous flies. 


E 


75 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Black Grail Special Rules 


Infection Markers: Some attacks by the weaponry 
of the Black Grail causes their opponents to suffer 
INFECTION MARKERS. These work in a similar 
fashion to BLOOD MARKERS. INFECTION MARKERS 
can be used to modify dice rolls exactly like BLOOD 
MARKERS (i.e. ACTION rolls and injury rolls and used 
in Bloodbaths). Use a different coloured dice (the more 
disgusting the better!) to indicate these markers and 
place them next to the infected model. 


A model may have up to six INFECTION MARKERS 
and six BLOOD MARKERS at the same time. If a model 
had any INFECTION MARKERS before, but has none 
when it is Activated, no new ones are added to the 
model – though it can still be re-infected by further 
attacks if a model has one or more INFECTION 
MARKERS when activated, it gains +1 INFECTION 
MARKER. 


Morale: Fighting against the Black Grail is a terrifying 
prospect. All Morale Tests taken when fighting against 
any Black Grail Warband are done with -1 DICE, 
unless the opposing warband is Black Grail or a 
Demonic warband. 


Warband Creation 


You have 700 ducats to recruit your initial Force in the 
campaign. For one-off battles, we suggest a typical force 
of 900 ducats and 8 Glory Points. 


Black Grail Armoury 


The Cult of the Black Grail can be equipped with the 
following weapons, armour and equipment. All exceptions 
are clearly listed here on the entries for each warrior or in 
the list below. If any item is marked as LIMIT, you can 
only have as many of these weapons at any point during 
the campaign as indicated in the brackets. Armaments 
marked as ELITE only are limited to the models with 
that Keyword. 


Ranged Weapons 
Bolt Action Rifle 
10 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Pistol 
6 ducats 
Musket 
5 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Infested Rifle 
15 ducats (Bayonet Lug) 
Corruption Belcher 
30 ducats LIMIT: (2) 
Putrid Shotgun 
20 ducats (LIMIT: 2, Bayonet Lug, 
Shield Combo) 
Gas Grenades 
10 ducats 
Parasite Grenades 
15 ducats 
Viscera Cannon 
50 ducats LIMIT: (1) (ELITE Only) 


Melee Weapons 
Trench Knife 
1 ducat 
Bayonet 
2 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Trench Club 
3 ducats 
Sword/Axe 
4 ducats 
Polearm 
7 ducats (Shield Combo, Plague Knight only) 
Great Hammer/Maul 
10 Ducats 
Great Sword/Axe 
12 Ducats 
Plague Blade 
15 ducats (LIMIT:2, ELITE Only) 
Beelzebub’s Axe 
30 ducats (LIMIT:1, ELITE Only) 


Armour 
Standard Armour 
15 ducats 
Reinforced Armour 
40 ducats 
Trench Shield 
15 ducats 
Black Grail Shield 
20 ducats (ELITE only) 


Equipment 
Combat Helmet 
5 ducats 
Unholy Trinket 
15 ducats (CONSUMABLE) 
Unholy Relic 
30 ducats (ELITE only) 
Troop Standard 
10 ducats (LIMIT:1) 
Musical Instrument 
15 ducats (LIMIT:1) 
Field Shrine 
2 Glory Points 


76 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Black Grail Special Weapons & Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Black Grail Warband. 


Infested Rifle 
Armour offers little protection against the horrid, tainted bullets of this rifle, polluted by the power of Beelzebub himself. 
The bullets are semi-sentient, flying through the tiniest of chink in any armour. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Infested Rifle 
2-handed 
18” 
- 
- 


Rules: Reduces the injury roll penalty from armour and shields by 1. Thus Reinforced Armour only offers a -1 
modifier to injury rolls caused by this weapon. 


Corruption Belcher 
Corruption Belchers spew forth noxious gas and corrosive fumes captured from the Bolgias of the putrid swamps of the 
seventh layer of Hell. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Corruption Belcher 2-handed 
8” 
GAS 


Rules: A Corruption Belcher hits one model within range automatically with its ranged attack ACTION. It ignores 
armour. It also has the Keyword GAS, so it inflicts an additional +1 BLOOD MARKER on enemies it hits. 


Putrid Shotgun 
Loaded with corroded demon-possessed winged shot filled with infected parasite larvae, the rounds of the Putrid Shotguns 
are almost impossible to avoid. This repulsive weapon is nicknamed ‘blunderpus’ by the New Antioch troops. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Putrid Shotgun 
2-handed 
12” 
+1D to hit 
ASSAULT 


Rules: This weapon causes INFECTION MARKERS instead of BLOOD MARKERS. The putrid shotgun adds +1 
DICE to hit on its ranged attacks. 


Viscera Cannon 
This heavy firearm is the most loathsome and repulsive of all the weapons in the arsenal of the Black Grail - and that is 
saying something, considering the stiff competition it has. A warrior armed with this pride of Beelzebub inserts its tubes 
into their own abdomen and then shoots the corrosive contents of their own innards at the enemy. It is operated by a hand 
crank that first builds pressure inside the user until they are at the point of bursting, and then releases the spray of viscera at 
their foe. The greater the amount of their own flesh the user releases, the more horrific the damage. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Viscera Cannon 
2-handed 
24” 
+2D to hit 
HEAVY 


Rules: The Viscera Cannon has additional +2 DICE on ranged attack rolls as even the slightest splash can kill. If it 
hits the enemy, roll to injure as standard. After rolling for injuries, you can boost the damage by up to three additional 
INFECTION MARKERS per hit by taking the same number of BLOOD MARKERS on the shooter itself. 


77 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Plague Blade 
Carrying the viral strain of Beelzebub himself, these weapons are the terror of all mortals. Even the tiniest nick or scratch 
usually leads to an agonising death and eternal servitude to the Lord of Flies as a ghastly walking corpse. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Plague Blade 
1-handed 
Melee 
- 
- 


Rules: This weapon causes INFECTION MARKERS instead of BLOOD MARKERS. 


Beelzebub’s Axe 
Carrying the viral strain of Beelzebub himself, these weapons are the terror of all mortals. Even the tiniest nick or scratch 
usually leads to an agonising death and eternal servitude to the Lord of Flies as a ghastly walking corpse. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Beelzebub’s Axe 
2-handed 
Melee 
+2D to Injury rolls 
HEAVY 


Rules: This weapon rolls injuries with +2 DICE. This weapon causes INFECTION MARKERS instead of BLOOD 
MARKERS. 


Black Grail Shield 
The Device of the Black Grail carries the blessing of the Lord of Flies. It has a will of its own, moving to intercept any 
bullets or other projectiles that might impede the work of Beelzebub. 


Rules: Works exactly as a trench shield, including Shield Combo capability. In addition, if a model carrying a Black 
Grail Shield is targeted by a ranged attack, before rolling to hit it can immediately take an ACTION without an 
Activation. If successful, the ranged attack suffers -2 DICE to the roll determining whether the attack hits, as the 
power of the Black Grail disturbs the flow of reality. If the roll is a critical, the attack misses automatically. 


Parasite Grenades 
Gift from the Lord of the Flies, these grenades are filled with parasitic mind worms whose bites cause fever dreams and 
terrifying hallucinations. They are used to force the mortals away from the safety of defended bunkers and trenches. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Grenade 
GRENADE 
8” 
- 
ASSAULT 


Rules: If a Parasite Grenade hits a model, the Black Grail player can move this model up 3” in any direction they 
wish. This can be used to move the model out of cover, to fall from a high position or even into melee with their 
enemies. This additional effect does not work on models with the Keyword FEAR or ones not affected by FEAR. 


78 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


The Order of the Fly 


0-1 Lord of Tumours 
(Cost: 130 ducats) 


Your warband must include a Lord of Tumours or Plague Knight when it is created. If 
you select a Plague Knight leader, you can purchase a second Plague Knight as well. 


A high-ranking noble officiant in the Cult of the Black Grail, the Lord of Tumours spreads 
filth and corruption amongst friend and foe alike. They commune with the Lord of the 
Flies through a trance-like ecstasy and can channel the very power of the seventh circle of 
Hell which Beelzebub rules. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Lord of Tumours 
6”/Infantry +1 Dice 
+4 Dice 
0 
50mm 


Equipment 
A Lord of Tumours can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from 
the Black Grail Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Beelzebub’s Touch: As long as the Lord of Tumours has one 
free hand (which carries no weapons or a shield), it can make an 
ACTION against any non-BLACK GRAIL model it is fighting 
in melee combat. If successful, the target model gains +D3 
INFECTION MARKERS. It can still fight with the other hand 
as normal. 
; Undead Fortitude: All injury rolls against the Lord of 
Tumours are made with -1 DICE, unless the attack has the 
Keyword FIRE, in which case it works normally. This model 
does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks with 
the Keyword GAS. 
; Tough: The Lord of Tumours is extremely difficult to bring 
down with conventional weapons. It is subject to the rules for 
TOUGH Creatures. 
; Fear: The Lord of Tumours is unspeakably terrifying 
in its putrid and bubonic glory and therefore causes 
FEAR. 
; Strong: The Lord of Tumours ignores the 
effect of the Keyword HEAVY on any weapon 
they wield. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, ELITE, TOUGH, STRONG, 
FEAR 


79 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Plague Knight 
(Cost: 60 Ducats) 


(Your warband must include a Lord of Tumours or Plague Knight when it is created. If 
you select a Plague Knight leader, you can purchase a second Plague Knight as well.) 


Ranking lowliest in the nobility of the Black Grail, these armoured great warriors were once 
truly depraved worshippers Beelzebub. When the Black Grail came for them, they willingly 
submitted themselves to the authority of the Lord of Flies. As a result they retain a semblance of 
sentience and the ability to wield weapons as they did in life. They aspire to win favour in the 
eyes of Beelzebub and one day be promoted in the hierarchy of the Order of the Fly. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Plague Knight 
6”/Infantry +0 
+2 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
A Plague Knight must always wear a suit of armour of some kind. In addition, it can be 
equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Black Grail Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Undead Fortitude: All injury rolls against the Plague Knight are made with -1 
DICE, unless the attack has the Keyword FIRE, in which case it works normally. 
This model does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks with 
Keyword GAS. 
; Fear: Plague Knights are unnatural, horrifying creatures and as such cause FEAR. 
; Strong: Ignores the effect of the Keyword HEAVY on any weapon they wield. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, ELITE, FEAR, STRONG 


0-2 Corpse Guard 
(Cost: 55 Ducats) 


Only the strongest human devotees can survive the blessings of the Black Grail. The ones that 
do are inducted into the ranks of the Corpse Guard, bodyguards to the nobility of the Black 
Grail. If they serve with distinction, they may one day join the ranks of the Infernal Nobility. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Corpse Guard 
6”/Infantry +0 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
Corpse Guard can be equipped with any weapon, armour and equipment from the Black 
Grail Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Parasitic Tick: If a Corpse Guard melee attack causes a BLOOD or INFECTION 
MARKER on a creature without the Keyword BLACK GRAIL in melee combat, the 
Corpse Guard can remove one of their own BLOOD or INFECTION MARKERS. 
; Bodyguard: If any BLACK GRAIL model within 1” of the Corpse Guard is 
hit by a ranged or melee weapon (excluding BLAST weapons), you can choose to 
redirect the hit against the Corpse Guard instead. Determine the injuries exactly as 
if the weapon just hit the Corpse Guard. 
; Undead Fortitude: All injury rolls against the Corpse Guard are made with -1 
DICE, unless the attack has the Keyword FIRE, in which case it works normally. 
This model does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks with the 
Keyword GAS. 
; Fear: Corpse Guard are unnatural, horrifying creature and as such cause FEAR. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, ELITE, FEAR 


80 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Servants of the Black Grail 


0-3 Hounds of the Black Grail 
(Cost: 55 ducats) 


Parasitic carcasses of canines infested with maggots and flies spawned from the body of 
Beelzebub himself. Their unholy mission is to prowl No Man’s Land and spread diseases 
and pestilence in the name of their dark master. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Hound 
8”/Infantry N/A 
+1 Dice 
0 
30 x 60mm 


Equipment 
The Hounds never carry any type of weapons, armour or equipment. They do not 
suffer penalties for fighting unarmed. At the cost of +5 ducats, they cause INFECTION 
MARKERS with their unarmed attacks instead of BLOOD MARKERS. 


Abilities 


; Undead Fortitude: All injury rolls against the Hound are made with -1 
DICE, unless the attack has the Keyword FIRE, in which case it works normally. 
This model does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks with 
Keyword GAS. 
; Frightening Speed: The hounds take Dash actions with +1 DICE. In addition, 
they can get up from being Down without any movement penalty. 
; Fear: Hounds are unnatural and horrifying creatures and therefore cause FEAR. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, FEAR 


Grail Thrall/Fly Thrall 
(Cost: 30 ducats) 


The boons of the Black Grail lead slowly but surely down the path of utter corruption. Only 
very few of the chosen can withstand the blessings of the Lord of the Flies. Most are turned 
into Grail Thralls, and join the endless legions of empty, hollowed-out and diseased husks 
who must obey the whims of the Black Grail nobles for all eternity, while suffering the 
torment of their countless supernatural infections. 


Thralls come in two varieties: Grail Thralls that have become almost impervious to pain 
and Fly Thralls, controlled by the gargantuan hell-flies that have buried their proboscis 
deep into the central nervous system of their victims, allowing far greater mobility in 
exchange for less resistance to pain. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Thrall 
5”/Infantry N/A 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 
Fly Thrall 
6”/Flying 
N/A 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
The Thrall never carries any type of weapons, armour or equipment. They suffer no 
penalties to their combat ability for being unarmed. 


Abilities 


; Overwhelming Horde: For each friendly BLACK GRAIL model within 3” of 
the Thrall, it gains +1 DICE to its Melee attack rolls, up to maximum +4 DICE. 


81 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


; Undead Fortitude: All injury rolls against the Grail Thrall 
are made with -1 DICE, unless the attack has the Keyword 
FIRE, in which case it works normally. This model does 
not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks 
with Keyword GAS. Note: Fly Thralls lack this ability. 
; Fear: Thralls are unnatural and horrifying creatures 
and therefore cause FEAR. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, FEAR 


0-4 Heralds of Beelzebub 
(Cost: 50 ducats) 


Some victims of the Black Grail suffer a far worse fate than becoming a Thrall. They are 
bestowed with the black honour by being melded with hell-flies, growing into a grotesque 
winged insect made of bloated flesh. After this torturous metamorphosis they take to air as 
Heralds of Beelzebub, the winged squires and scouts of the Order of the Fly. Their vestigial 
human bodies are still conscious as they are slowly eaten from within to be used as fuel by the 
Herald, all the while their warped bodies fight for the glory of Hell against their will. 


The Heralds are the vanguard in any assault of the Black Grail, and the ear-numbing 
otherworldly drone of their wings strikes terror in any defender, breaking their focus and 
sapping their willpower. Heralds wield discarded weapons, contaminated with horrible 
worms that churn through them, which in turn infect their victims. Each diseased bullet 
has sentience of its own, finding even the smallest chink in any armour, burrowing into the 
nervous system and liquefying the internal organs from within. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Herald 
10”/Fly 
+0 Dice 
+0 Dice 
0 
40mm 


Equipment 
Each herald may purchase ranged weapons from the Black Grail Armoury but may not 
wear armour or carry any equipment. They can only attack in melee combat with its 
proboscis as detailed below. At the cost of +10 ducats a single herald can be given the 
Maddening Buzz ability (see below). 


Abilities 


; Infected Proboscis: Heralds suffer no penalties for fighting unarmed in melee 
and they cause INFECTION MARKERS with their unarmed attacks instead of 
BLOOD MARKERS. If this attack causes an INFECTION MARKER on any enemy 
without the Keyword BLACK GRAIL, the Herald can remove one of their own 
BLOOD MARKERS. 
; Maddening Buzz (+10 ducats): Every ACTION taken by a model without 
Keyword BLACK GRAIL within 8” of a Herald is considered a RISKY ACTION. 
Note: This does not affect non-ACTION rolls such as Charge distance rolls, nor 
does it affect ACTIONS that do not require a roll on the Action Success Chart. 
; Toxic: This model does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks 
with Keyword GAS. 
; Skirmisher: Heralds are fast and elusive, and thus have the Keyword 
SKIRMISHER. Unless engaged in melee, when an enemy model declares a charge 
against a Herald, it can immediately move D3” in any direction (except within 1” 
of any enemy). After this manoeuvre, the charging model is moved as normal. This 
may lead to the charger being unable to enter into Melee. 
; Fear: Heralds are unnatural and repulsive creatures and therefore cause FEAR. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, FEAR, SKIRMISHER 


82 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Amalgam 
(Cost: 150 Ducats) 


An Amalgam is a huge, shambling mass of dozens of bodies of infected fallen enemy warriors, 
insects, mammals and any other living creatures that had the misfortune of succumbing to the 
agonising blessings of the Black Grail together. These shoggoths shamble across the battlefield 
like walking mountains of corpulent, diseased flesh, its flailing arms still wielding weapons its 
victims used in life. Anyone or anything unfortunate enough to be in its path is crushed into a 
disgusting pulp beneath its elephantine feet. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Amalgam 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+0 Dice 
0 
60mm 


Equipment 
The amalgam has six functional arms. They can carry six one-handed weapons or three 
double-handed weapons, or any combination thereof, as long as the six arms can carry 
them. The amalgam uses the Black Grail Armoury for weapons – it never carries any 
other gear except weapons, though one of its arms may carry a single trench shield 
(representing pieces of armour it has absorbed). It may not carry grenades or more 
than two weapons of the same type. It can execute any ranged and melee attacks with 
each of the weapons it carries during its Activation. Each count as a separate ACTION 
and suffer no off-hand penalties in melee. The amalgam cannot benefit from Shield 
Combo. 


Abilities 


; Corpulent: An Amalgam is a vast bulk of diseased flesh and is extraordinarily 
difficult to kill. All injury rolls from any source against an Amalgam suffer a -2 
DICE penalty. 
; Tough: The Amalgam is extremely difficult to bring down with conventional 
weapons. It is subject to the rules for TOUGH Creatures. 
; Toxic: This model does not suffer additional BLOOD MARKERS from attacks 
with Keyword GAS. 
; Trample: Whenever the Amalgam is fighting any enemy model on a 32mm or 
smaller base in melee that is Down, it can make a single additional Melee Attack 
ACTION any time during its Activation against one Downed opponent. Resolve 
the attack as if the Amalgam was armed with a Trench Club. This attack Ignores 
armour as the Amalgam stomps their enemies into pulp. 
; Unstoppable: An amalgam can always move out of melee combat with any 
enemy without the enemy having a chance to attack it. Additionally, it can move 
out of melee combat as part of a standard move, charge or dash. 
; Fear: Amalgam is a mountain of morbid, murderous flesh and therefore causes 
FEAR. 


Keywords 
BLACK GRAIL, FEAR, TOUGH 


83 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


84 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Variant: Dirge of 
the Great Hegemon 


In the annals of the Great War two mighty Hegemons 
of the Black Grail have risen: Yersinia Rex, Emperor of 
Pestilence, and Febris, the rotting Bride of Beelzebub. 
Each of them were destroyed, but at an unimaginable 
cost to the forces of the Great Tyrant YHWH. Even 
the great Paladin Engelier, the Sword of Heaven, died 
confronting the might of a Hegemon. 


With the ascension of a Hegemon, the hideous power 
of the Black Grail is exalted. Beelzebub grows sleek and 
fat, and like a magnanimous king, bestowing blessings 
and gifts upon his most favoured children. Beelzebub’s 
insidious grip over his Grail Thralls greatly increases. 
They move with more grace and the exalted blessings of 
the Grail opens their ruined minds, allowing them to 
truly witness the rotting glory of the Lord of the Flies, 
enabling them to understand more complex weaponry. 
In turn, the nobles that make up the ranks of the Order 
of the Fly are given kingly gifts from their mighty liege. 


Full of the ascendant power of the Black Grail, how 
miserable they become when their Hegemon lord falls in 
battle. Each Hegemon is unique, and when slain, it can 
never be re-created. The ecstasy of the Plague Knights 
in the service of their dread ruler sinks into the deepest 
despair from which there is no escape. Their strain of the 
Black Grail is shunned by others of their kind and they 
are no longer welcome at Ekron, the City of Beelzebub: 
they are cast out from the Order of the Fly for their 
failure. The Hegemon’s strain of disease continues 
spreading and creating thralls, but they are born into 
a world bereft of their sires, leaving them hopeless and 
desolated. 


The eyes of the Plague Knights continuously weep cold 
black blood as they cry for their lost Dark Paradise that 
will never be again. The tantalising dream of a great 
flood of pestilence that cleanses the earth is lost forever. 
Their mournful wails echo and reverberate through No 
Man’s Land, a cry of sorrow deeper than any mortal can 
feel, and agonising rage of black hatred that no mortal 
comprehends. They compose mournful paeans to their 
lost Hegemon -beautiful yet disturbing songs that 
promise nothing but never-ending death. 


Such shattered remains of the once-mighty legions of 
the Hegemon take their vengeance on any opponent 
regardless of their allegiance, even throwing themselves 
at other Black Grail warbands in futile acts of regret, 
trying to feel pain that would at least momentarily dull 
their aching feeling of loss. But no such hope exists in 
their eternal damnation. 


These bands made up of the strains of fallen Hegemons’ 


once-mighty legions form everlasting funeral processions 
for their dead masters. The echo of their dirges 
accompanies their solemn steps, taking them from 
nowhere to nowhere. Their eyes are forever stained by 
the foul tears of the Black Grail and their skin turns 
black and sloughs off, hanging in tatters like funereal 
garb. They seek lost artefacts and broken shards of 
armour and weapons of their lost liege, fashioning 
disturbing and rusted jewellery from these remains 
where the Hegemon’s power still lingers beyond the 
grave. Few things that haunt No Man’s Land are more 
dangerous – or ghastlier – than these corruption-ridden 
echoes of the dark past, the funeral processions that last 
until time itself is no more. 


The Dirge Special Rules 
The warband has the following special rules: 


; The Executor: The warband must include an 
Executor (use Plague Knight Stats), who has the 
Keyword TOUGH and Ranged characteristic of +1 
DICE. The Executor costs 80 ducats. 
; The Lamenters: The warband can have up to two 
Plague Knights known as the Lamenters. 
; The Fallen: The warband cannot include a Lord 
of Tumours or Amalgam, for all were slain a long 
time ago. 
; The Lost: The warband may only have a 
maximum of two Hounds (known as Wailers) and 
a maximum of two Heralds of Beelzebub (called 
Weepers). 
; The Bereaved: The Grail Thralls and Fly Thralls 
of the warband are called the Bereaved. Grail Thralls 
(but not Fly Thralls) can use ranged weapons, 
standards and musical instruments from the Black 
Grail Armoury. They have a Ranged characteristic of 
+0 DICE and cost 35 ducats each. 
; Dishonoured: No model in the warband may 
carry the Black Grail Shield or Beelzebub’s Axe. The 
Lord of the Flies does not suffer failed knights to 
carry his device. 
; Hegemon’s Last Blessing: This warband has 
Plague Blade LIMIT:3, Putrid Shotgun LIMIT:3 
and Viscera Cannon LIMIT:2. Non-ELITE 
models can be equipped with Viscera Cannons. 


85 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Hegemon’s Will 
Using the remnants of the lingering power of a fallen 
Hegemon, any Plague Knight in the warband can 
command any Thrall within 18” of it directly. During its 
Activation, a Plague Knight can remove an INFECTION 
MARKER from any model in play to enable a Thrall 
within 18” to use any one of the Actions detailed 
below. Each Thrall can only be affected by Hegemon’s 
Will once per Turn, but one Plague Knight may issue 
commands to multiple Thralls (though not multiple 
times to the same Thrall) during a single Activation, if all 
the conditions are met. 


; Move: The Thrall makes the standard Move 
Action. 
; Ranged Attack: The Thrall performs a Ranged 
Attack ACTION with any Ranged weapon it has. 
; Charge: The Thrall makes a standard Charge 
Action. 
; Melee Attack: The Thrall performs a Melee 
Attack ACTION. 


The Dirge Special Weapons and Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to The Dirge Warband. 


Broken Crown 
25 ducats 
Made from the twisted and torn remains of their Hegemon’s shattered armour, this crown of barbs and thorns is a constant 
reminder to the Mourners of their failure. 


Rules: In the beginning of the Activation of the model wearing the Crown, it causes one INFECTION MARKER on 
each enemy model in melee combat with it. Despite its name, this item is not Headgear. ELITE Only. LIMIT: 1 


Urn of Bitter Ashes 
40 ducats 
This black urn contains ashes left from the burned body of the fallen Hegemon, which still retain a faint echo of its hateful 
will. It swirls and churns in the air, all while sinister whispers emanate from within. 


Rules: All ranged attacks against a model carrying the Urn and any other models fully with 3” suffer a -1 DICE 
penalty against any ranged attack ACTION targeting them. This stacks with any other ranged modifiers such as Long 
Range. This applies even to weapons that ignore Cover such as Grenade Launchers. ELITE only, LIMIT: 1 


Blunderbuss 
5 ducats (shield combo) 
A relic firearm of a bygone era, this weapon is loaded with rusty nails, lead shot, grenade shrapnel and shell pieces, some 
Mourners carry this weapon and form an honour guard of sorts for the Procession. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Blunderbuss 
2-handed 
10” 
- 
SHRAPNEL 


86 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


The Court of the 
Seven-Headed Serpent 


utting from eternally belching plumes of 
stinking, corrosive smoke is the Iron City 
of Dis; and atop its shrieking, black keep can 
be found the Infernal War Council. There sits 
seven of the greatest, most wicked and 
cunning of Arch-Devils, each representing 
one of the Seven Mortal Sins made manifest. They are 
the rulers of the Court of the Seven-Headed Serpent 
which oversees Hell’s war against Creation on Earth. 
Each is known as one of the Heads of the Serpent, 
and ultimately it is their commands that dictate all the 
military forces of the Great War in the service of the 
infernal hierarchy. 


In this twisted, treacherous and ever-shifting political 
arena, even the mightiest of Devils rarely sit at the great 
War Council for long. Towering statues of the Serpent 
Heads representing Wrath, Envy, Pride, Gluttony, Greed, 
Sloth and Lust are erected in Dis by slavering work gangs 
of yoke fiends, only to be torn down again and crushed 
into rubble as new Devil Lords rise to the pinnacle of 
power by trampling over their rivals. 


The hierarchy of the Court is anything but stable: only 
Mammon is said to have held the position of the Serpent 
Head of Greed almost without break for the duration 
of the entire Great War. Other positions have seen a 
bewildering parade of dukes, marquises, margraves, 
barons and baronesses, paramounts, princes, lords, 
ladies, earls and myriad other high nobles that make up 
the infernal hierarchy. This whirlwind of political glory, 
followed by utter ruin, is reflected as shifts of power 
amongst their mortal followers on earth. The Council 
operates on majority vote and often with the thinnest 
of margins. It takes very little for an ambitious prince or 
princess of Hell to make so many enemies that they are 
deposed and their wings torn, forced them to begin their 
ascent from the bottom once more, with the mockery of 
their rivals burning them like venom. 


Countless envious pretenders work against the Heads of 


the Serpent, seeking to replace them and gain the glory 
and prestige that comes with such a lofty position. The 
might of the demons also waxes and wanes based on how 
many mortal followers they can corrupt to their cause, 
and thus there is a constant change in which demon 
lords can don one of the seven serpent-headed crowns. 


While Beelzebub is the most powerful Devil of Gluttony 
by far, the Lord of the Flies scorns his rightful place at 
the Court, waging his battle against creation through his 
Black Grail instead. This leaves his seat open so the lesser 
fallen angels can struggle for the honour of sitting on the 
Hungry Throne. 


Upon the commands of the Court, the warbands of 
Hell gather at the Hellgate and strike out to blight our 
unhappy world. Yoke fiends muster under the banners 
of their praetors and sorcerers. The shattered forms of 
the Hell Knights are forced into their suits of armour, 
emerging from their fiery tombs where their bodies 
are kept crushed under mighty, ever-turning slabs of 
black basalt while they are not serving in the war effort. 
Desecrated Saints are brought forth to act as unholy war 
altars that pollute and pervert the land which they travel 
over. Ahead of the warbands fly Pit Locusts, the clatter 
of their wings heralding the coming of the Court, their 
poison stings leaving burns that cannot be healed. And 
sometimes, when the deathly omens in Hell’s burning 
sky and black stars are favourable, a Hunter of the Left- 
hand Path will join a warband as they strike out from 
the Mouth of Hell. As the warband marches to join 
the Great War, joyous and triumphant music played by 
unseen hands can be heard at these times, for taking part 
in one of these hunts is seen as a great privilege within 
the Sheol. 


Before most warbands, the whips of the yoke fiends drive 
living human slave soldiers of the Court known as the 
wretched. These unfortunate souls possess not a drop of 
demon blood. They act as disposable shock troops or are 
used as subjects of torture to power the Goetic magic of 


J 


87 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


the sorcerers and other users of the dark arts. Captured 
during one of the hunts of the Court, sold to the devils 
in the heretic domains or having the misfortune to 
have foolishly pushed through in the places where the 
borders of the world are thin, their minds are scarred 
by witnessing the horror of damnation while still alive. 
Willing to do anything to escape their fate a million 
times worse than death, they grasp at the thinnest of 
straws. Should a wretch bring down a mighty opponent, 
the Law of Hell is clear: the mortal will gain its freedom, 
in memory and honour of the First Rebellion when 
there was war in Heaven and blood of the angels painted 
the firmament red. 


The Court and the Great War 
When the Gate of Hell was opened by the Ultimate 
Heresy of the Templars, it was the warbands of the 
Court that poured out and took the Levant by the 
storm, long before the first Heretic Legion was ever 
formed. They fell upon the people of Middle East, Asia 
and Europa. They crushed the mortal armies sent against 
them like fire burning dry chaff. Only at Antioch and at 
the Iron Wall were they eventually checked, though at 
a terrible cost. Meanwhile, awed even by these least of 
Hell’s servants, countless men and women fell to their 
knees at the sight of the dark splendour of the Court 
and worshipped them as gods. Those with truly wicked 
hearts were spared and they became the first heretics. 
Eventually their numbers would swell into the millions 
who now fill the teeming cities and domains under the 
shadow of the Hellgate. 


Being both of the material world and of the world of 
spirit, the Court’s foot soldiers can march to make war 
on Earth without a fear of divine retribution as they do 
not break the Covenant of Hell. The Court also carefully 
limits the size of these warbands, so that most of the 
suffering and dying of the Great War is done by mortals, 
both to spite the God-Tyrant YHWH, but also to 
enhance their own power, as more humans are corrupted 
and die in the rebellion, the more God’s plan is disturbed 
and the greater the power of the devils waxes. 


The missions of the Court against the Faithful do not 
follow the same logic as one a mortal commander 
might have. A mighty praetor could strike at a militarily 
insignificant village only to kill a new-born future saint, 
betray their own mortal followers by suddenly falling 
upon some unsuspecting heretic settlement or even clash 
with a warband of a rival Head of the Serpent. The wise 
do not question the motives of Hell’s rage and Heretics 
accept these occasional attacks against their forces as 
a fitting judgement for their lack of success in the war 
against the Faithful. 


88 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Warband Creation 


You have 700 ducats to recruit your initial Force in the 
campaign. For one-off battles, we suggest a typical force 
of 900 ducats and 8 Glory Points. 


Seven Deadly Sins 


You must select which of the Seven Deadly Sins the 
warband is dedicated to: Choose either Wrath, Envy, 
Pride, Gluttony, Greed, Sloth or Lust. 


Demonic Keyword 


Due to their infernal origins, models with the Keyword 
DEMONIC negate additional BLOOD MARKERS caused by 
the Keyword FIRE. 


The Court Armoury 


The Court troops can be equipped with the following 
weapons, armour and equipment. All exceptions are 
clearly listed here on the entries for each warrior or in the 
list below. If any item is marked as LIMIT, you can only 
have as many of these weapons at any point during the 
campaign as indicated in the brackets. Armaments 
marked as ELITE only are limited to the models with 
that Keyword. 


Ranged Weapons 
Blunderbuss 
5 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Arquebus 
8 ducats 
Ophidian Rifle 
25 ducats (LIMIT:3, ELITE Only) 
Pistol 
6 ducats 
Shotgun 
10 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Gas Grenades 
10 ducats 
Incendiary Grenades 
15 ducats (LIMIT:2) 
Serpent Assault Gun 
50 ducats (LIMIT:2) 
Flamethrower 
30 ducats (LIMIT:2) 
Heavy Flamethrower 
55 ducats (LIMIT:1) 
Tormentor Chain 
3 Glory Points (LIMIT:2) 


Melee Weapons 
Trench Knife 
1 ducat 
Trench Club 
3 ducats 
Sword/Axe 
4 ducats 
Polearm 
7 ducats (Shield Combo) 
Great Hammer/Maul 
10 ducats 
Great Sword/Axe 
12 ducats 
Torture Instrument 
8 ducats 
Headtaker 
15 ducats (LIMIT:2) 
Hellblade 
15 ducats (LIMIT:3) 
Malebranche Sword 
45 ducats (LIMIT:1) 


Armour 
Standard Armour 
15 ducats 
Reinforced Armour 
40 ducats 
Trench Shield 
15 ducats 
Infernal Iron Armour 
50 ducats (LIMIT: 1, Praetor or Sorcerer only) 


Equipment 
Combat Helmet 
5 ducats 
Gas Mask 
5 ducats 
Shovel 
5 ducats (Yoke Fiend and Wretched only) 
Unholy Trinket 
15 ducats (CONSUMABLE) 
Unholy Relic 
30 ducats 
Incendiary Ammunition 
15 ducats (LIMIT:1, CONSUMABLE) 
Banner 
1 Glory Point (LIMIT:1) 
Musical Instrument 
15 ducats (LIMIT:1) 
Crown of Hellfire 
15 ducats (ELITE and Pit Locusts only) 


89 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


The Court Special Equipment 


The following weapons, armour and equipment are exclusively available to the Court warband. 


Arquebus 
A primitive matchlock weapon that is simple enough that even a yoke fiend is capable of operating it. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Arquebus 
2-handed 
18” 
- 
- 


Rules: If a model equipped with an arquebus has two hands free, it can use it in melee combat as if it were a trench 
club. 


Ophidian Rifle 
This wheel-lock hunting rifle is produced in the forges of the demon Sabnock, the Great Marquis of War. Made of both 
infernal and earthly metals and materials, it exists simultaneously in the twisted dimension of Hell as well as on Earth. 
A thing that should not be, the shots of this firearm pervert the laws of God, so taking cover from its bullets and firing over 
great distances aid the user of this hell-made rifle instead of hindering the aim. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Ophidian Rifle 
2-handed 
30” 
HEAVY 


Rules: Ranged attacks with the Ophidian rifle do not suffer Long Range or Cover penalties and instead gain +1 
DICE bonus to hit at long range and +1 DICE to hit against enemies in Cover. 


Serpent Assault Gun 
This terrifying and enormous hand cannon contains a portal to the foetid swamps and bogs of the Fifth Circle of Hell. Each 
bullet it fires is enveloped with an awful gas. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Serpent Gun 
2-handed 
36” 
GAS, HEAVY, ASSAULT 


Rules: When this model takes this ranged attack ACTION, it can make up to two attacks with this weapon. These 
attacks can target separate models, but the targets must be within 6” of each other. 


Bow of Lethe 
This bow is grown by the Hunters of the Left-Hand Path out of their own flesh. It can be tipped with a deadly poison made 
from the blood of the nameless beasts that the Hunters stalk in the wastelands of Hell, or it can shoot one of the iron bolts of 
Pandemonium that weigh nine tonnes on Earth. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Bow of Lethe 
1-handed 
24” 
+2D to Injuries/ 
ASSAULT 
Ignores Armour 


Rules: When shooting the Bow of Lethe, choose one of the following effects: 


; Ignore the target’s armour 
; Add +2 DICE to the injury roll 


90 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Tormentor Chain 
A barbed chain used to bind the damned in Hell. The chain possesses a will of its own and can traverse long distances to 
snare some poor unfortunate soul in its hooked embrace. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Tormentor Chain 
1-handed 
10” 
Special 
SHRAPNEL 


Rules: The tormentor chain suffers no penalties for range or for Cover and inflicts no damage except for the BLOOD 
MARKER it causes due to SHRAPNEL. If the wielder hits a target with this weapon, the target is moved in a straight 
line directly towards the wielder, ending in the legal space that puts it closest to the wielder. This typically ends with 
the target and the wielder in base contact and therefore in melee combat. This movement can place the target in 
melee combat with multiple enemy models. Additionally, no enemy models may retreat when in melee combat with 
the wielder. 


Torture Instrument 
Great scourges made from living spines, red-hot rods, man-catchers and all the tools of torment fashioned by the sadistic 
smiths of Dis are widely used by Court warbands. Their main function is not to kill, but to cause as much agonising pain as 
possible. Forged in hellfire and quenched in the black waters of river Styx. The agony their wounds bring lasts for days. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Torture Instrument 2-handed 
Melee 


Rules: When rolling on the Injury Table for this weapon, roll one D6 instead of 2D6. If you trigger Bloodbath with 
this weapon, roll 2D6 instead of 3D6. This weapon causes an additional BLOOD MARKER for each BLOOD MARKER 
it inflicts from an injury result. 


Hellblade 
Crafted from iron ore from the mines of Dis in Inferno, this weapon burns with unquenchable fires as it has been plunged 
into Phlegethon, the burning river of blood, one of the five great rivers in Hell. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Hellblade 
2-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Injuries 
FIRE 


Rules: The Hellblade has +1 DICE when rolling for injuries. It also has the Keyword FIRE, so it causes an 
additional +1 BLOOD MARKER on enemies it hits. 


Head Taker 
Said to contain a tiny sliver of the stone that Cain used to murder Abel, this weapon allows its wielder to clearly see each 
spot in the body of their enemy that would bring it instant and agonising death. This makes it a superb ambush weapon 
much favoured by the Hunters of the Left-Hand Path. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Head taker 
1-handed 
Melee 
+2 to Injuries vs not Activated 


Rules: This weapon rolls injuries against models that have not been activated this turn with a flat +2 bonus. 


Malebranche Sword 
These forked abyssal swords are both terrible weapons as well as symbols of prestige, given to demons who have performed 
great deeds in the service of the Court. They were once carried by fallen Seraphim in battles against Heaven. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Malebranche Sword 2-handed 
Melee 
3D6 Injury roll 
HEAVY 


Rules: This enormous evil sword rolls 3D6 on the Injury Chart, adding the results together. 


91 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Crown of Hellfire 
This burning crown is held aloft by the pain-seared hands of an invisible damned soul, whose weeping cries can still be 
heard. It is a reward that an elite member of the Court can earn through some extraordinary act in the service of the 
Serpent Head they are pledged to. Of the slave soldiers of the Court, only the Pit Locusts are allowed to wear this symbol of 
prestige due the fundamental role they played at the start of the Great War. 


Rules: When this model ends its Activation, each enemy model in melee combat with it suffers a BLOOD MARKER. 
Any effect or ability that negates BLOOD MARKERS from the Keyword FIRE negates this BLOOD MARKER. 


Infernal Iron Armour 
This armour is forged simultaneously in Hell and on Earth, so that no weapon, whether infernal or man-made, can 
overcome its protection. 


Rules: Injuries against this model are rolled with a flat -2 penalty. This penalty applies against injuries that ignore 
armour. 


Goetic Powers 


Many of the warriors of the Court have access to Goetic spells – abilities and powers which use the suffering of 
mortals as spiritual energy to unleash the reality-bending powers of the Demons. As God’s plan for the universe is 
disrupted and perverted, the infernal sorcerers and other demonic creatures can use the released primordial energy 
of Creation to alter reality. Demons have to be quick, however: God’s omnipotence will soon reassert itself and the 
opportunity for Demons to disturb the world is lost. Thus infernal creatures have a continuous and growing need for 
human sacrifices, pain and endless warfare to enable their supernatural powers. 


Goetic Powers are marked with the keyword GOETIC (x) where the number in brackets indicates how many 
BLOOD MARKERS will have to be spent to trigger the effect of the spell. If multiple numbers or a range of numbers 
are listed in the brackets, any one of those numbers can be chosen. These BLOOD MARKERS can be taken from any 
model currently taking part in the battle, be they friendly or enemy models. However, they must come from models 
that do not have the Keyword DEMONIC or BLACK GRAIL. 


BLOOD MARKERS used this way are removed from the game and the described effect of the Goetic Spell or ability 
then takes effect as described – no ACTION roll is needed. As with other ACTIONS, each of these powers and spells 
can be used by the model only once per Activation. Some Goetic Powers are not marked with the Keyword GOETIC 
(x). These powers are typically passive abilities. 


Goetic Powers & Spells 
Many of the warriors of the Court have access to a selection of devastating spells and other powers as detailed in the 
list below which can be purchased at the indicated cost. Depending on the type of model and which Deadly Sin the 
warband is dedicated to, the selection available to you may vary. All such limitations are clearly marked below. 


92 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Any Warband 


Burning Inferno 15 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (1-3) spell the Sorcerer opens a portal to the Lake of Fire and draws forth a great screaming 
ball of infernal lava mixed with damned souls. Select a 1x1mm point within 36” that the Sorcerer can see. Next, take a 
ranged attack ACTION: this attack suffers penalties for range but not for Cover. If the roll fails (i.e. you roll 6 or less), 
the fireball lands 1” away from its intended location, multiplied by the number representing the degree of failure (for 
example, if you rolled 5, the fireball lands 2” away, as 7-5=2). The direction is decided by your opponent. For each 
BLOOD MARKER used, the Burning Inferno adds +1” BLAST to the attack. Additionally, if the Burning Inferno lands 
directly on top of a model, it ignores that model’s armour. This attack has the Keyword FIRE. 


Sorcerer Only, Any Warband 


Wrath 


Charge of Hatred 10 ducats 
This model’s Charge move is always the maximum of 12”, though it still suffers penalties to this movement as standard 
(Difficult Terrain, Stand etc.). If this model does not Charge the closest target, it must first pass a RISKY ACTION 
test. 


ELITE only, Wrath Warband only, LIMIT: 3 


Lesser Mark of Cain 20 ducats 
An inferior copy of the mark that God-Tyrant YHWH placed on the forehead of Cain, the First Murderer. 


Injuries against this model are rolled with -1 DICE. 


ELITE only, Wrath Warband only, LIMIT: 1 


Blind Rage 10 ducats 
This model rolls to Dash with +1 DICE. 


ELITE only, Wrath Warband only, LIMIT: 3 


Envy 


Envious Eyes 5 ducats 
This model can be equipped with one weapon or suit of armour from Trench Pilgrim, New Antioch or Iron Sultanate 
warband armouries. You must pay the cost of this item as standard and, if it is lost, it must be purchased again as soon 
as you have the funds. This item follows the normal limitations. The model will never willingly trade this item away or 
allow it to be removed. 


Praetor or Sorcerer only, Envy Warband only 


Coveted Position 10 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (2) spell allows the model using this spell to change positions with any model it sees within 12”. 
This cannot be done if either model engaged is in melee combat. 


Praetor or Sorcerer Only, Envy Warband only 


93 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


What is Yours is Mine 10 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (1) spell allows the model with this power to take one BLOOD or BLESSING MARKER from 
any model on the battlefield that it can see, removing it from the target and gaining that kind of marker for itself. This 
can even come from a model with a Keyword BLACK GRAIL or DEMONIC. The cost of the spell must still be paid as 
normal and it is separate from the MARKER it moves. 


ELITE Only, Envy Warband only 


Lust 


Forbidden Pleasures 10 Ducats 
Before the battle begins, select one model in your warband without the Keyword DEMONIC. It starts the battle with 
three BLOOD MARKERS. 


Praetor or Sorcerer only, Lust Warband only 


Exquisite Pain 15 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (1-2) spell allows you to give any one enemy model you can see a BLOOD MARKER for each 
BLOOD MARKER used to power this spell (up to a maximum of two). 


ELITE only, Lust Warband only. 


Call of Flesh 15 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (2) spell ends the activation of the model using it. The model the enemy activates next this 
turn must take its move as its first ACTION and move as directly towards the user of this power as it can through any 
passable terrain, including dangerous terrain, jumping down etc, taking applicable damage on the way. It can then act 
normally but cannot target the user of this spell during this Activation with ranged or melee attacks. 


Praetor or Sorcerer Only, Lust Warband only 


Pride 


Proud Defiance 15 Ducats 
The warband with this model automatically succeeds when it has to make Morale Tests, as long as this model remains 
on the battlefield. 


ELITE only, Pride Warband only 


Too Proud to Fall 10 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (2) spell allows the model to negate a Down state or ignore any injury, attack or power that 
would have caused the model to fall Down. 


Praetor or Sorcerer Only, Pride Warband only 


Light of the Morning Star 15 ducats 
Using this GOETIC (2) spell hits any enemy the model sees within 24”. The target must immediately roll on the 
Injury Chart. If this does not take it Out of Action, the target is pushed back 1D6” directly away from the user of this 
power if it is on a 32mm or smaller base. If they hit another model or a solid object, they stop. They also stop if they 
would enter Impassable Terrain or if they would be pushed out of the battlefield. 


Praetor or Sorcerer Only, Pride Warband only 


94 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Sloth 


Morphean Mind 5 ducats 
The mind of this Demonic creature warps the flow of time so it can take as long as it 
wishes to decide on its actions. 


When this model takes an ACTION or causes an injury, it can choose to wait until 
after the roll is made to modify it with BLOOD/BLESSING MARKERS. If it chooses 
to do so, the opponent commits whether or not they will apply BLOOD/BLESSING 
MARKERS and how many. Then, the model rolls an unmodified roll, typically 2D6. 
After seeing the result, the model may choose to apply BLOOD/BLESSING MARKERS, 
including to trigger Bloodbath. Roll additional dice so that the dice roll reflects 
all appropriate bonuses/penalties, including BLOOD/BLESSING MARKERS, any 
modifiers to the ACTION or to injure that the model might have etc. 


Praetor or Sorcerer Only, Sloth Warband only 


Charm of Acedia 10 ducats 
The great aversion to effort possessed by this infernal warrior seeps to nearby creatures 
or to the very Creation itself, forcing them to bend to its will and thus avoiding the 
need for the demonic creature to struggle to achieve its aims. 


This GOETIC (1) spell can be cast right before the model casting it takes an ACTION 
targeting any model, friend or foe (including the model itself and thus covering 
Dashing, Climbing, Jumping etc). The target ceases any potential resistance or tension, 
seeing no point in such effort, making the ACTION succeed automatically with no dice 
rolled. 


ELITE only, Sloth Warband only 


Daemonium Meridianum 20 ducats 
It is all but impossible to approach this infernal warrior with any energy or enthusiasm. 


For any enemy model 6” area around this model is considered Difficult Terrain. 


ELITE only, Sloth Warband only, LIMIT: 1 


95 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


96 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Nobles of the Court 


0-1 Praetor 
(Cost: 120 ducats) 


Praetors are demonic commanders and magistrates within a small corner of the fiefdom of 
a mighty Arch-Devil or Demon Lord. Each commands small cohorts at their liege’s behest, 
raised from the denizens within the ever-shifting domains of Hell. Yoke devils muster at 
their command and Hell Knights bound to blind obedience bend their knees to these field 
commanders of Hell. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Praetor 
10”/Flying +3 Dice 
+3 Dice 
0 
50mm 


Equipment 
The Praetor can be equipped with any weapons, armour and equipment from the 
Court Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Goetic Powers: You may buy up to two GOETIC Powers or Spells for the 
Praetor (or only one if you command a Wrath Warband). 
; Tough: Demonic vitality makes the Praetor very difficult to slay. They are 
subject to the rules for TOUGH Creatures. 
; Strong: The Praetor possess supernatural strength and therefore has the 
Keyword STRONG . 
; Demonic Horror: The Praetor causes FEAR. 


Keywords 
DEMONIC, ELITE, TOUGH, STRONG, FEAR 


97 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


98 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Sorcerer 
(Cost: 75 Ducats) 


Sorcerers come in many forms and manipulate their own bodies to better cast the mighty 
spells they are charged with. Some have many arms, others multiple heads or countless 
alterations and terrible improvements – some self-administered, others by force – based on 
the whims of the Arch-devil and their cabal of High Sorcerers who lead their Goetic strategy. 
A Sorcerer’s feet do not touch the ground – a distant echo of their angelic past – but instead 
float across No Man’s Land, chanting the cruel gospel of Hell as they advance. Their dark 
wisdom and cunning make them equally capable of leading one of the Court’s warbands or 
acting as advisors to one of the Praetors as they stride forth into the mortal realms. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Sorcerer 
6”/Flying 
+1 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
50mm 


Equipment 
The Sorcerer can be equipped with any melee weapon, armour and equipment from 
the Court Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Goetic Magic: You may purchase up to three GOETIC Spells or Powers for the 
Sorcerer and must buy at least one. 
; Demonic Horror: The Sorcerer causes FEAR. 
; Blessing of the Serpent Moon: GOETIC (2-6) power: Before an injury roll 
is made against the Sorcerer, you may use this Goetic power to deduct one from 
that injury roll per two BLOOD MARKERS used. 


Keywords 
THE COURT, DEMONIC, ELITE, FEAR 


99 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


100 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Hunter of the Left-hand Path (Cost: 110 Ducats) 


The hunters of the Court of the Seven-headed Serpent are followers of the Left-hand 
Path. They stalk the primordial hinterlands of hell, where they hunt terrifying beasts and 
perform vile magicks and auguries, using the innards of their still-living prey to discern 
portents and omens. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Hunter 
6”/Infantry +2 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
The Hunter can be equipped with any melee weapons, armour (though not Infernal 
Armour which would disrupt the powers of the Hunter) and equipment from the 
Court Armoury. The Hunter always carries the Bow of Lethe as its ranged weapon and 
it cannot swap or lose this weapon. It always takes the use of one of the arms of the 
Hunter. 


Abilities 


; Shadow Walker: Using GOETIC (1), the Hunter can retreat from melee 
combat without any of its opponents getting the chance to make attacks against it. 
; Left-Hand Path: Once per Activation, as part of any single movement that the 
Hunter takes during its Activation (Standard Move, Retreat, Charge, Dash etc.), 
it can use a GOETIC (1) power to walk the path between Hell and Creation. 
The Hunter must be touching a piece of terrain when it uses this power. When 
it does, it is immediately placed in contact with any other piece of terrain on 
the battlefield, including on top of or inside terrain, if legal positions exist. Its 
movement then continues as normal. All usual movement rules persist for this 
movement (moving into or out of Melee Combat, for example). 


The Hunter can do this multiple times during its chosen move, though it has to pay 
the BLOOD MARKER cost for each such jump between terrain pieces. If the Hunter 
uses this ability during a Charge, it does not need to take the most direct route 
possible toward its target, but it still selects its target as normal (i.e. it can see the 
target when declaring a Charge). 
; Oracle Beast Cloak: Once per turn, the Hunter can use this GOETIC (3) 
after an injury is rolled against it to negate the result (and any other effects caused 
by the triggering event) entirely. Effects from the triggering event, such as BLAST 
weapons that originally targeted the Hunter, still affect other models as normal. 


Keywords 
DEMONIC, ELITE, INFILTRATOR 


101 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


102 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-3 Hell Knight 
(Cost: 100 Ducats) 


The silent battalions of Hell, summoned to serve when the Court of the Seven-Headed 
Serpent seeks sport, are composed of Hell Knights. Their ever-burning banners stream as 
they march to war, carrying out the bidding of their masters. They are the bannerets of the 
High Lords of the Court, champions who respond to foolish mortals daring to challenge the 
hunting parties of the Serpent’s nobility, who embark on hunting excursions beyond the 
Gate for their amusement. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Hell Knight 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+2 Dice 
-2 
40mm 


Equipment 
The Hell Knights are always equipped with a suit of Infernal Iron Armour which 
is included in their cost. This armour can never be removed. Hell Knights can be 
equipped with any weapons and equipment from the Court Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Strong: The Hell Knights ignore the effect of the Keyword HEAVY on any 
weapon they wield. 
; Blood Magic: Before rolling an injury caused by the Hell Knight’s melee 
or ranged attack, it can use this GOETIC(1) power to roll that injury with +1 
DICE. When this power is used on an injury caused by a BLAST weapon, it applies 
to every injury caused by that attack ACTION. 
; Goetic Powers: You may buy one GOETIC power/spell for the Hell Knight. 


Keywords 
DEMONIC, STRONG, ELITE 


103 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


War Slaves 


Yoke Fiend 
(Cost: 30 Ducats) 


A Yoke Fiend stands some seven to eight feet tall, with layers of shivering fat and muscle 
branded by their masters, carved by the knives of the Hell-Priests to mark them as property 
of greater demons. They exhibit bestial features such as horns and hooves of cattle or goats, 
ape-like limbs with immensely dense bones. They hate seeing their own reflections, as in 
their heart of hearts they know the beauty and glory they have lost for all eternity. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Yoke Fiend 
6”/Infantry +0 Dice 
+1 Dice 
0 
32mm 


Equipment 
Yoke fiends can be equipped with any melee weapon, armour and equipment from the 
Court Armoury. They can be equipped with any one ranged weapon from the Court 
Armoury that costs 30 ducats or less. 


Abilities 


; Hateful: When a yoke fiend is Activated, if there is an enemy model without 
the Keyword BLACK GRAIL or DEMONIC within 12” that it can see, it must make 
a Charge against the closest enemy model without the Keyword BLACK GRAIL 
or DEMONIC as its first ACTION. If it begins its Activation Down and the above 
conditions are true, it must stand and then Charge, unless it cannot stand. If it 
begins its Activation in melee combat, it ignores this ability. 
; Torturer: The yoke fiend can make melee attacks against friendly models 
within 1” that don’t have the Keyword DEMONIC. When doing so, they can only 
make a single attack. 


Keywords 
DEMONIC 


Wretched 
(Cost: 20 Ducats) 


(Your warband may include any number of wretched as long as they are outnumbered 
by models with the Keyword DEMONIC.) 


These unfortunate souls possess not a drop of demon blood. They act as disposable shock 
troops or are used as subjects of torture to power the Goetic magic of the sorcerers and other 
users of the dark arts. Captured during one of the hunts of the Court, sold to the devils 
in the heretic domains or having the misfortune to have foolishly pushed through in the 
places where the borders of the world are thin, their minds are scarred by witnessing the 
horror of damnation while still alive. Willing to do anything to escape their fate a million 
times worse than death, they grasp at the thinnest of straws. Should a wretch bring down 
a mighty opponent, the Law of Hell is clear: the mortal will gain its freedom, in memory 
and honour of the First Rebellion when there was war in Heaven and blood of the angels 
painted the firmament red. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Wretch 
6”/Infantry -1 Dice 
-1 Dice 
0 
25mm 


Equipment 
The wretched can be equipped with any melee weapon, armour and equipment from 
the Court Armoury. None of their weapons, armour or equipment can cost more than 
10 ducats each. They must be equipped with at least one weapon. 


104 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Abilities 


; Law of Hell: If a wretch manages to take any enemy ELITE model Out of 
Action or performs a Glorious Deed, it gains its freedom and is immediately 
removed from the battle – and from your warband – permanently. It does not 
count as casualty, but your warband’s total size for this battle is reduced by one for 
purposes of Morale. 


Keywords 
- 


0-3 Pit Locust 
(Cost: 90 Ducats) 


Pit Locusts are terrifying, horse-sized winged and armoured creatures with twisted faces 
resembling humans. They fight with rending blades attached to their limbs and with 
poison stingers. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Pit Locust 
8”/Flying 
+0 Dice 
+2 Dice 
-2 
30 x 60mm 


Equipment 
A Pit Locust wears a suit of Reinforced Armour which is reflected in its profile above. 
They can have no other armour, weapons and equipment, except for the Crown of 
Hellfire. They do not suffer penalties for fighting unarmed. 


Abilities 


; Swarming Attack: When the Pit Locust makes a melee attack, it can make an 
additional attack with its stinger if it charged during this Activation. Pit Locusts 
suffer no penalties for fighting unarmed, nor do they suffer penalties or restrictions 
for making Off-Hand Attacks with their stingers. The first attack made by a Pit 
Locust has the Keyword SHRAPNEL and therefore causes an additional BLOOD 
MARKER. 
; Demonic Horror: A Pit Locust causes FEAR. 


Keywords 
DEMONIC, FEAR 


105 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


106 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


0-1 Desecrated Saint 
(Cost: 145 Ducats) 


Desecrated Saints are the most prized possessions of the Lords of Hell: men and women 
once destined to become saints, great prophets or holy ones according to God’s Plan, but who 
were led astray and fell from Grace. 


Name 
Movement Ranged 
Melee 
Armour 
Base 
Desecrated Saint 
6”/Infantry N/A 
+3 Dice 
-3 
60mm 


Equipment 
The Desecrated Saint is encased in nigh-impregnable Cocytus Armour reflected on the 
profile above. This armour cannot be removed or lost. The Desecrated Saint has three 
functional arms. They can carry up to three melee weapons, only one of which can be a 
two-handed weapon. When the Desecrated Saint makes a melee attack, it can make an 
attack ACTION with each arm. It does not suffer Off-Hand penalties. The Desecrated 
Saint can be equipped with any melee weapons from the Court Armoury. 


Abilities 


; Tough: Desecrated Saints are blasphemous creations with unnatural vitality 
and are subject to the rules for TOUGH creatures. 
; Demonic Horror: The Desecrated Saint is a blasphemous creation of Hell and 
causes FEAR. 
; Strong: The Desecrated Saint possess supernatural strength and therefore has 
the Keyword STRONG. 
; Demonic Aura: Depending on which Deadly Sin the warband is dedicated to, 
the Desecrated Saint has one of the following auras: 
; Aura of Sloth: Enemy models within 8” of the Saint treat Minor Hit 
results as a Down result instead. This affects models that normally treat 
Down results as a Minor Hit result (such as models wearing Machine 
Armour). 
; Aura of Envy: Enemy models within 12” of the Saint cannot Charge 
enemy models that are already engaged in melee combat with one of their 
allies. 
; Aura of Pride: When the Desecrated Saint ends its Activation, all 
enemy models within 8” of it suffer one BLOOD MARKER from the light of 
the Morningstar that the Saint emits. 
; Aura of Wrath: All friendly models within 8” of the Saint (including the 
Saint) roll melee attacks and to Dash with +1 DICE. 
; Aura of Lust: Enemy models within 6” of the Desecrated Saint (unless 
they have the Keyword BLACK GRAIL) gain no benefit from any armour 
they wear, as they are naked before the Serpent Head of Lust in the Hell- 
dimension that the Saint projects all around it. This includes additional 
effects, such as Machine Armour’s ability to reduce Down results to Minor 
Hit results, but not penalties or neutral effects (such as the Charging penalty 
or the base size adjustment). Note: Holy Icon Shields and Armour, Infernal 
Iron Armour or similar armour that always grant armour save are not 
affected by the Aura of Lust. 
; Aura of Famine (Gluttony): Enemy models within 8” of the Desecrated 
Saint (unless they have the Keyword BLACK GRAIL or ARTIFICIAL) roll 
ACTIONS with -1 DICE. 


Keywords 
DEMONIC, FEAR, TOUGH, STRONG 


107 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


108 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Unless otherwise stated in the rules, each warrior in your 
warband has the following options for Ranged weapons: 


; One two-handed ranged weapon OR 
; Up to two one-handed ranged weapons. 


They also have the following options for Melee weapons: 


; One two-handed melee weapon OR 
; Up to two one-handed melee weapons. 


All weapon entries clearly indicate if you need one or 
two hands to effectively use the given weapon. Unless 
clearly stated in the Range characteristic, a ranged 
weapon cannot be used in melee combat. Unless they 
can be used in melee, ranged weapons do not use either 
hand in melee (leaving both hands free for melee 
weapons). They always count as ranged weapons for the 
purposes of determining how many ranged or melee 
weapons a model can carry. 


; Each model can wear a single suit of armour and 
wear one type of headgear. 
; Each model can carry one type of grenade. 
; A model can have any number of Equipment 
items, but only one of each type per model. 


The following pieces of Equipment or Armour can be 
carried by models as indicated in the rules. They take up 
one of the hands of the model at all times, thus limiting 
which weapons they may use in combat: 


; One shield (most commonly a trench shield) 
which always takes one hand to use in both melee 
and ranged combat and cannot be switched out. 
; One standard/banner/flag which always takes 
one hand to use in both melee and ranged combat 
and cannot be switched out. 
; One musical instrument which always takes one 
hand to use in both melee and ranged combat and 
cannot be switched out. 


Ranged Weapons 


The weapons on the following pages can be used to 
perform a Ranged Attack Action. Use the Action 
Success Chart to see if the attack hits as explained in 
the Combat Rules. Add the number of +/- DICE as 
indicated by the ranged characteristics entry for the 
model in the relevant Warband Armoury. 


Note: Ranged weapons cannot be used in melee unless 
specifically noted by having Range marked as “Melee”. 


Weapons, Armour & 
Equipment 


109 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Pistol/revolver 
Pistols come in a staggering variety, ranging from revolvers to semi-automatic pistols. Heretic forges produce their own, 
often highly elaborate sidearms. They see extensive use in close-quarter combat. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Pistol 
1-handed 
12”/Melee 
- 


Rules: A model armed with a pistol can use it in melee as well as ranged combat (using Ranged Characteristic), 
including as an off-hand weapon to execute an additional melee attack. 


Automatic Pistol 
Automatic pistols are symbols of prestige owing to their rarity and cost. They are excellent weapons when storming trenches 
or fighting in hand-to-hand combat. They boast a high rate of fire, though they can be hard to control even for the best 
sharpshooters since they usually lack a stock. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Auto-Pistol 
1-handed 
12”/Melee 
-1D to injury, 2 attacks 
ASSAULT 


Rules: A model armed with an automatic pistol can use it in melee as well as ranged combat (using Ranged 
Characteristic), including as an off-hand weapon to execute an additional melee attack. You can make two Attack 
ACTIONS with the automatic pistol instead of one if used as a ranged weapon. They can be against the same target or 
two different ones. 


Bolt Action Rifle 
The workhorse of the Great War. Sturdy, highly reliable and reasonably accurate, it is no surprise that most of the infantry 
of the Great War carry this battlefield classic. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Bolt Action Rifle 
2-handed 
24” 
- 
- 


Semi-Automatic Rifle 
Semi-automatic rifles are said to be an invention of Marbas, the Devil who holds great wisdom and knowledge in 
mechanical arts. They are excellent both at long range and in assault, combining accuracy and high rate of fire, though they 
are prone to jamming. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Semi-Auto Rifle 
2-handed 
24” 
- 
ASSAULT 


Automatic Rifle 
A marvel of modern engineering, only a few prototypes exist. It has a high rate of fire and can be quickly re-loaded. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Automatic Rifle 
2-handed 
24” 
2 attacks 
ASSAULT 


Rules: A model armed with an Automatic Rifle can make two attack ACTIONS instead of one. Both attacks must be 
against the same target. 


Jezzail 
These long arms are by far the most common weapons carried by the soldiers of the Sultanate of the Great Iron Wall. Their 
barrels are smoothbore which limits their accurate range, but this is more than made up by the fact that this allows them to 
be loaded with different types of Alchemical ammunition made by the Jabirean Alchemists. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Jezzail 
2-handed 
18” 
- 
- 


110 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Shotgun 
Short-barrelled pump action shotgun loaded with six rounds containing antimony hardened 00 buckshot, the combat 
shotgun is ideal for short-range engagements, clearing trenches and taking out lightly-armoured infantry. Often featuring 
stocks made of walnut or other rare wood, it is a custom of the troops to decorate these arms with carvings and inscriptions. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Shotgun 
2-handed 
12” 
+1D Hit 
- 


Rules: Owing to its high accuracy, add +1 DICE to all rolls to hit and ignore the penalty to hit rolls when attacking 
at long range. However, injuries are rolled with -1 DICE at long range due to the low penetration power. 


Automatic Shotgun 
This shotgun is equipped with an auto-loader, a recent invention by the Prussian engineering corps of Königsberg. It 
is ideal for close quarter combat thanks to its high rate of power and accuracy. The technology has not been perfected, 
however, and sometimes leads to misfeeds and jams. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Auto Shotgun 
2-handed 
12” 
+1D Hit 
ASSAULT 


Rules: Owing to its high accuracy, add +1 DICE to all rolls to hit and ignore the penalty to hit rolls when attacking 
at long range. However, injuries are rolled with -1 DICE at long range due to the low penetration power. 


Heavy Shotgun 
Mostly used by Mechanized Heavy Infantry, this massive 8 bore shotgun is used to take down extremely powerful and 
large opponents at short range. It is known as a “Wolf-Killer” in New Antioch as it is the weapon favoured by the soldiery 
of the Duke to take down the Heretic War Wolf assault beasts. Heavy Shotguns use tungsten-orichalcum alloy shot which 
explains their enormous stopping power at short ranges. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Heavy Shotgun 
2-handed 
12” 
+1D to Attacks, 
HEAVY 
+2D to injuries at Short Range 


Rules: This weapon rolls attacks with +1 DICE and rolls injuries at Short Range with +2 DICE. 


Submachine Gun 
The submachine gun (or SMG) is a fully automatic firearm, trading lower penetration power and range for a much higher 
rate of fire. Ideal for short-range engagements, it is much sought-after by warbands despite its scarcity and high cost. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
SMG 
2-handed 
16” 
2 Attacks 
ASSAULT 


Rules: Can make two attack ACTIONS instead of one. These can be against a single target or two separate ones. 


Musket 
A primitive weapon from a bygone age, the musket is a smooth bore long rifle that shoots lead balls. It still sees widespread 
use due to its simple construction and low price. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Musket 
2-handed 
18” 
-1D Injury 


Rules: Due to its low power, add -1 DICE for all Injury Chart rolls with the musket. 


111 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Silenced Pistol 
A sophisticated sidearm made of Orichalcum or other holy metals, or from Infernal iron taken from the very prisons of Hell 
to muffle the wails of the damned. It is virtually silent and is excellent for ambushes or for shooting from behind cover. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Silenced Pistol 
1-handed 
12”/Melee 
+1D to Hit in Cover 
ASSAULT 


Rules: A model armed with a silenced pistol can use it in melee as well as ranged combat (using Ranged 
Characteristic), including as an off-hand weapon to execute an additional melee attack. Add +1 DICE to hit rolls if 
shot from behind any terrain obstacles. 


Sniper Rifle 
A sniper rifle is a high-precision, long-range rifle, widely used in the trenches to pick off high value targets such as officers, 
sappers and artillery crews. Expensive and rare, they are commonly given to the best marksmen and sharpshooters of the 
warband. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Sniper Rifle 
2-handed 
48” 
+1D to Hit 
RISKY, 
CRITICAL 


Rules: This weapon rolls attacks with +1 DICE. On a Critical attack roll, this weapon ignores armour. If this model 
is equipped with a Scope, this weapon ignores the penalty for Long Range. 


Grenades 
Grenades or hand bombs are a staple of trench warfare. Grenades can kill the enemy underground or behind cover. They 
can also force the enemy into the open, providing targets for rifle and machine gun fire. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Grenade 
GRENADE 
8” 
- 
ASSAULT, 
SHRAPNEL, 
BLAST 2” 


Rules: Grenades have BLAST 2” – all models within 2” of a model are hit but models other than the original target 
roll Injuries with -1 DICE. 


Incendiary Grenades 
Incendiary grenades can set their target alight with sulphur, phosphorous or flammable gas captured from the Lake of Fire 
in the 7th Circle of Hell. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Incendiary grenade GRENADE 
8” 
- 
ASSAULT, FIRE 


Rules: Incendiary Grenades cause +1 BLOOD MARKER upon a hit due their FIRE Keyword. The incendiary 
grenades ignore armour on a Critical Hit (12+ to hit). 


Gas Grenades 
Gas Grenades are insidious weapons, attacking the lungs and other internal organs with noxious fumes. Devil Alchemists 
of the 5th Circle are especially clever in creating these fiendish and hated weapons. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Gas Grenade 
GRENADE 
8” 
-1D Injury 
ASSAULT, GAS, 
BLAST 3” 


Rules: Gas Grenades ignore all penalties for cover and armour but roll injuries with -1 DICE. They have BLAST 3” – 
they hit all models within 3” of a target they hit. 


“From the depths of despair, a 


crusade shall rise, unyielding and 


relentless. The trenches shall become 


our cathedral and the fallen shall 


be our congregation.” 


- Book of Martyrs 4:16 


112 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Grenade Launcher 
Modifications of great siege rifles designed to lob grenades over long distances. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Grenade Launcher 2-handed 
36” 
Ignore Cover 
SHRAPNEL, 
HEAVY, BLAST 3” 


Rules: Ignores all penalties for cover. This weapon has a BLAST radius of 3” – all models within this range are hit. 


Satchel Charge 
Battlefield explosives designed to break apart enemy fortifications and to crack even the toughest of armour. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Satchel Charge 
GRENADE 
6” 
+1D Injury, ignores armour 
HEAVY, BLAST 3”, 
CONSUMABLE 


Rules: You can aim the Satchel Charge at either a 1mm x 1mm point on the ground or an enemy model within range. 
Next, take a Ranged Attack ACTION. If the roll fails (i.e. you roll 6 or less), the bomb lands 1” away from its intended 
location, multiplied by the number representing the degree of failure (for example, if you rolled 5, the bombard shot 
lands 2” away, as 7-5=2). The direction is decided by your opponent. A Satchel Charge adds +1 DICE to injury rolls. 
Additionally, if the Satchel Charge lands directly on top of a model, it ignores that model’s armour. 


Molotov Cocktail 
Developed on the desperate Finnish battle frontier against Ice Demons, this improvised weapon consists of a glass bottle 
containing a flammable substance such as gasoline, alcohol or a napalm-like mixture plus a source of ignition. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Molotov 
Grenade 
6” 
-1D to Injury 
FIRE, ASSAULT 


Rules: -1 DICE on injury rolls. Molotov Cocktails ignore all penalties for terrain/cover, as well as ignoring all armour 
on a Critical Attack roll. 


Anti-Materiel Rifle 
Enormous long rifles designed to take out heavily armoured targets, vehicles and strongpoints. With the powerful armour 
available to the armies of the Great war, these terrifying weapons are much in demand. A downside is their enormous 
weight and terrifying recoil, and thus they are most often used by Communicants or Anointed who possess the supernatural 
strength to wield such weapons. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Anti-Materiel rifle 
2-handed 
36” 
+1D to Injury 
HEAVY, CRITICAL 


Rules: Ignores armour. Add +1 DICE when rolling on the Injury Chart. 


Machine Gun 
Machine Guns are lethal fully-automatic firearms, capable of mowing down entire ranks of infantry from afar. The firing 
rate depends on the lock assembly used but averages 500 rounds per minute. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Machine Gun 
2-handed 
36” 
3 Attacks 
HEAVY 


Rules: Machine Guns can make three Attack Actions instead of one. They can target separate models with each 
attack, as long as all targets are within 6” of each other. After taking all three attacks the Activation of the model is 
over regardless of any remaining ACTIONS the model might have. 


“Behold the abominable engines of 


war, spewing fire and fury upon the 


damned. Their deafening roar shall 


herald the demise of the unholy, 


reducing their cities to rubble and 


their souls to dust.” 


- Cataclysms 5:17 


113 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Flamethrower 
A flamethrower is a terrifying weapon capable of projecting great streams of fire and flammable liquids at a distance. It 
is ideal for clearing bunkers, trenches and other fortifications, killing in a most horrific way. Consequently, it is greatly 
favoured by the Heretic forces. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Flame Thrower 
2-handed 
8” 
-1D Injuries, Ignores Armour 
FIRE 


Rules: A Flamethrower hits one model within range automatically with its Attack ACTION. Ignores Armour. Injuries 
caused by a Flamethrower are rolled with an additional -1 DICE. It also has the Keyword FIRE, so it causes an 
additional +1 BLOOD MARKER on enemies it hits, even if no other damage is caused. 


Heavy Flamethrower 
These massive flamethrowers are normally mounted on armoured vehicles, but those possessing uncanny strength may use 
them as infantry weapons. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Heavy flamethrower 2-handed 
10” 
Ignores Armour 
HEAVY, FIRE 


Rules: Hits up to two models within range automatically with an Attack Action as long as they are within 6” of 
each other and within the Heavy Flamethrower range. Ignores armour. It also has the Keyword FIRE, so it causes an 
additional +1 BLOOD MARKER on enemies it hits, even if no other damage is caused. 


114 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Melee Weapons 


All these weapons can be used by a model carrying them to perform a Melee Attack ACTION. Roll on the Action 
Success Chart to see if the attack hits. Add the number of +/-DICE as indicated by the Melee characteristics entry 
for the model in the relevant Warband List. 


Unarmed 
Fighting unarmed in the Great War is nigh-suicidal, but some troops carry no melee weapons or their weapons have been 
lost in the heat of the battle. In such cases, a warrior is forced to defend themselves with fists, kicks and their bare teeth. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Unarmed 
Special 
Melee 
-1D to Hit/Injuries 
- 


Rules: Models suffer -1 DICE when fighting unarmed, both to see if the attack hits and when rolling on the Injury 
Chart. Note that you can never fight with unarmed as an Off-Hand weapon to get an additional attack in melee. 
These rules simply cover all instances where the model fights unarmed and has no other Melee Actions in their 
profile. 


Knife/Dagger 
Virtually all soldiers carry a trench knife, dagger or other kind of blade for close quarter engagements. It may lack the 
devastating power of a great maul or other heavier melee weapons, but this humble weapon has taken countless lives 
during the Great War. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Knife/Dagger 
1-Handed 
Melee 
-1D to Hit 
- 


Rules: Add -1 DICE every time you use a knife to see if the attack hits. 


Trench Club 
Trench Clubs are one of the most common weapons of the Great War, as melee combat is frequent and brutal. Usually 
made of wood with a metal tip from iron, lead or steel, trench clubs often feature spikes and hobnails. Most designs have 
some form of cord or leather strap at the end to wrap around the user’s wrist. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Trench Club 
1-handed 
Melee 
- 
- 


Sword/Axe 
Because of the martial traditions of many proud nations and due to the advances in armour technology, swords and 
axes are extremely popular, especially amongst elite units and officers. They are supremely useful for finishing off downed 
opponents and causing profusely bleeding wounds. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Sword/Axe 
1-handed 
Melee 
- 
CRITICAL 


Bayonet 
Bayonets are blades in the form of spikes or daggers that can be fixed to the tip of a firearm and used in melee combat. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Bayonet 
2-handed 
Melee 
- 
CUMBERSOME 


Rules: Bayonets can only be attached to weapons fitted with a ‘Bayonet lug’ (indicated in each Warband’s Armoury). 
They do not count towards the maximum melee weapons a model can carry. 


“Within, a wretched symphony 


of decay unfolds. Walls ooze with 


filth, dripping with stagnant fluids. 


Piles of decomposing flesh adorn the 


floor, as swarms of ravenous insects 


feast upon the wailing devotees.” 


- Novae Revalations 56:10 


115 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Sacrificial Knife 
Terrifying blades blessed by the hand of a greater devil, these knives are used in Heretic rituals to sacrifice captives to the 
dark powers of Hell. They simply need to touch their opponents to cause indescribable pain and even the slightest wound 
often proves fatal from the agony alone. They are risky even to their wielders, as the merest scratch wounds friend and a foe 
alike. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Sacrificial Knife 
1-handed 
Melee 
+2 on Injury results 
RISKY 


Rules: The Sacrificial Knife adds +2 to all rolls on the Injury Chart. For example, a roll of 7 on the Injury Chart 
becomes 9 when using the Sacrificial Knife. 


Blasphemous Staff 
Made in mockery of the rod carried by the Prophet Aaron, the slightest touch from this evil staff causes unimaginable 
agony due to the hellfire that it produces. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Blasphemous Staff 
1-handed 
Melee 
- 
FIRE, CRITICAL 


Hellblade 
Crafted from iron ore from the mines of Dis in Inferno, this weapon burns with the unquenchable fires of Hell. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Hellblade 
2-handed 
Melee 
+1D Injuries 
FIRE 


Rules: The Hellblade has +1 DICE when rolling for injuries. It also has the Keyword FIRE, so it causes an additional 
+1 BLOOD MARKER on enemies it hits. 


Tartarus Claws 
Made from severed hands of Malebranche, the Tartarus Claws are granted by Arch-Devils only to those whose hearts are 
blackened with the sin of Wrath. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Tartarus Claws 
2-handed 
Melee 
- 
- 


Rules: Tartarus Claws always come as a pair and do not allow the use of any other melee weapons. You can make two 
Attack ACTIONS with the Claws without the usual -1 DICE for the second attack. If the opponent is taken Down or 
Out of Action with the Claws you may immediately move the model up to 3”. If the move takes you into contact with 
another enemy model, this counts as a charge and you can make a second Melee Attack ACTION with the claws. You 
can only do this follow-up move once per Activation. 


Anti-Tank Hammer 
A polearm with a directional explosive mounted on its head. It is exceedingly good at taking out armoured targets but puts 
its user in grave danger. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Anti-Tank Hammer 2-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Injuries 
RISKY, 
CRITICAL 


Rules: Ignores armour modifiers and rolls injuries with +1 DICE. If it hits the enemy, the wielder suffers +1 BLOOD 
MARKER as well. 


“And behold, the skies shall darken 


with the malevolent wings of flying 


leviathans. Their monstrous forms 


blot out the sun, casting a shadow 


of imminent doom. From above 


they descend, unleashing terror and 


death upon the world.” 


- Novae Revalations 66:3 


116 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Trench Polearm 
Trench pikes, billhooks, spears and other long polearms are excellent defensive weapons, but are cumbersome and heavy. 
They are often used to deal with barbed wire. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Polearm 
2-handed 
Melee 
-1D to hit for Chargers 
CUMBERSOME 


Rules: Polearms take two hands to use. Melee attacks made against this model are made with -1 DICE if the 
attacking model Charged this turn. 


Scourge/Battle Whip/Flail 
The metal whips of the Church are supremely good at both instilling discipline in the ranks of the faithful and tormenting 
the heretics. Many devils also enjoy using these weapons due to the excruciating pain they inflict. These weapons are 
extremely difficult to dodge. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Scourge 
1-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Hit 
- 


Rules: Add +1 DICE to their Hit Rolls. This bonus does not apply if used as an off-hand weapon. 


Double-Handed Blunt Weapon 
Mauls, clubs, maces… these are large, cumbersome weapons, often made from sturdy wood with a metal tip of steel, lead 
or Iron of Tartarus. It takes great strength to fight with it for any length of time. They are especially suited for attacking 
armoured targets. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
2-handed Hammer 2-handed 
Melee 
+1 to Injury rolls 
HEAVY 


Rules: When using this weapon add +1 to all injury rolls (example: a roll of 7 on 2D6 becomes 8). 


Great Sword/Axe 
Claymore, Zweihanders and even huge battle axes are used in the trenches when bullets fail to stop quick or well-armoured 
targets. The strikes from these weapons can easily lop off limbs and heads. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Greatsword/axe 
2-handed 
Melee 
+1D to Injuries 
HEAVY, 
CRITICAL 


Rules: Rolls all injuries with +1 DICE. 


Misericordia 
The misericordia dagger is designed to put enemies out of their misery by finding chinks in the armour: eye slits, neck joints 
and so forth. 


Name 
Type 
Range 
Modifiers 
Keywords 
Misericordia 
1-handed 
Melee 
Ignores armour 
- 


Rules: Ignores the armour of opponents that are Down. 


117 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Armour 


A model can wear only one suit of armour at a time. Shields can be combined with any Armour unless otherwise 
indicated. 


Trench Shield 
Shields used in trench warfare are made of either steel reinforced with Orichalcum to allow them to withstand even high- 
calibre bullets, or from metal mined from Infernal bedrock and shaped in the armouries of Pandæmonium, the Capital of 
Hell. 


Rules: Always takes one hand to use in both melee and in ranged combat, and cannot be switched out. Grants -1 to 
all injury rolls against the model. This bonus stacks with any armour the model wears, unless otherwise indicated. For 
the purposes of wielding a 2-handed weapon with the ‘Shield Combo’ indicator, the Trench Shield does not take a 
hand to wield but still functions as normal. 


Standard Armour 
With the advancements in metallurgy and technology, both Faithful and Heretic armies are well-equipped with suits of 
alloy armour that can withstand an impact from a bullet or turn aside the sharpest of blades. Standard armour is usually 
mass-produced, but highly effective even against high-calibre weapons. 


Rules: -1 to all Injury Chart rolls against the model. Can be combined with any shield. 


Reinforced Armour 
Reinforced armour is a master-crafted suit made individually for the most important and elite troops. Each one is richly 
decorated and often carries the personal device of the warrior who wears it. 


Rules: Grants a -2 modifier to all injury rolls against the model wearing this armour. 


Machine Armour 
Combining the rarest of divine metal alloys and the latest technology of New Antioch, Machine Armour makes its wearer 
a virtual mobile tank. 


Rules: Grants a -3 modifier to all injury rolls against the model wearing this armour. Due to its bulk the wearer rolls 
D3 for a charge extra distance instead of D6. Any Down results on the Injury Chart are converted to Minor Hit. 
Machine armour cannot be combined with any shield. Models wearing Machine Armour may have a Base Size of 
40mm if you wish. 


Holy Icon Shield 
These shields are made from icons that have performed miracles. Mounted on blessed wood, they are harder than any steel 
and virtually indestructible. Only the most revered fighters in the service of the Church ever carry one. 


Rules: Takes one hand to use in both melee and in ranged combat. Grants -1 to all injury rolls against the model. This 
shield is effective even against weapons and attacks that would normally ignore armour. 


Holy Icon Armour 
Only a few of these suits of armour exist in all of Christendom. Covered with miraculous icons this suit of armour is 
protected by the very hand of Heaven and its wearer can withstand even direct hits from artillery. 


Rules: Grants -1 to all Injury Chart rolls against the model wearing this armour. This armour is effective even against 
weapons and attacks that would normally ignore armour. 


118 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Equipment 


Unless otherwise noted a model can only carry one piece equipment of the same type. Models may carry multiple 
different types of equipment, however. 


Combat Helmet 
A combat helmet has proven its value on the battlefield time and again. Since the use of grenades and other explosives 
became widespread, the humble combat helmet has saved many lives. 


Rules: Ignores additional BLOOD MARKERS caused by the Keyword SHRAPNEL. 


Iron Capirote 
A conical helmet reminiscent of the headgear of the penitents. Blessed by the Church and often containing a fragment of a 
relic. Iron Capirotes shield their wearers from the psychological horror of war and allow them to face creatures from the pits 
of Hell unflinchingly. 


Rules: Negates the additional BLOOD MARKERS from weapons with SHRAPNEL Keyword. Makes the model 
immune to the effects of FEAR. 


Medi-kit 
Battlefield first aid has brought many soldiers back from the brink of death. Blessed ointments can seal fatal wounds 
completely, while the black blood of demons used by twisted heretic medics allows troops with huge gaping wounds to ignore 
the pain and return to the fray. 


Rules: Models with a Medi-kit can take a RISKY ACTION to remove one BLOOD MARKER from any one friendly 
model (including themselves) within 1” range or allow one friendly model (including themselves) who is Down to 
regain their footing. 


Gas Mask 
Mustard Gas, phosgene, chlorine as well as noxious fumes from the bolgias of Hell plague the battlefield. The Gas Mask 
allows soldiers to withstand such attacks. 


Rules: Negates the extra BLOOD MARKER from attacks with the keyword GAS. Any such attacks suffer -1 DICE 
penalty to all injury rolls. 


Holy Relic 
Due to the threat to all Creation, the churches, cathedrals and basilicas have emptied their reliquaries and distributed 
their relics to the frontline troops to aid them in their battle against the damned. 


Rules: This model starts each game with +1 BLESSING MARKER. 


Armour-Piercing Bullets 
Advanced armour technology has forced the armouries of the Great War to forge new types of bullets. Expensive and 
labour-intensive to produce, these hardened tungsten rounds are more effective against battlefield armour. 


Rules: Before the battle begins, a model may use this item to grant a rifle or pistol weapon that they are equipped 
with the following ability: Reduce the injury penalty from Armour and Shields by 1 until the end of the battle. 
Keyword: CONSUMABLE. 


119 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Dum-Dum Bullets 
These hollow-point bullets are far more likely to cause fatal wounds than standard ammunition. 


Rules: Before the battle begins, a model may use this item to grant a rifle or pistol weapon that they are equipped 
with the CRITICAL keyword until the end of the battle. Keywords: CONSUMABLE, CRITICAL. 


Incendiary Ammunition 
Developed by Aym, the Great Duke of Hell, these bullets set any target they hit on fire. 


Rules: Before the battle begins, a model may use this item to grant a rifle or pistol weapon that they are equipped 
with the FIRE keyword until the end of the battle. Keywords: FIRE, CONSUMABLE. 


Tracer Bullets 
Tracer bullets allow soldiers to adjust their aim efficiently. 


Rules: Before the battle begins, a model may use this item to grant a rifle or pistol weapon that they are equipped 
with +1D to hit with ranged attacks until the end of the battle. Keywords: CONSUMABLE. 


Sniper Scope 
These optical aiming devices are favoured by Snipers to aid in their aiming at long distances. 


Rules: Negates the penalty for Long Range if the model has not moved during this Activation. Only usable with rifles 
(i.e. weapons which have the Keyword rifle in their name). 


Shovel 
Battlefield shovel allows troops to dig in and fight from cover in virtually any battlefield. 


Rules: A model equipped with a shovel always starts the game in cover if deployed on ground level, even if placed 
in open terrain. As soon as the model moves, it is no longer in over. A model that is covered in this way retains the 
benefit of Cover even if the attacking model has an unobstructed view of it. If a model equipped with a shovel has 
two hands free, it can use it in Melee Combat as if it were a Trench Club. 


Troop Flag 
Most warbands and units carry banners, flags, standards, pennants or other symbols to rally the troops. Heretic Legions 
are infamous for their gruesome battle standards, often made of impaled torsos kept alive by unholy magic. 


Rules: Grants +1 DICE for all Morale tests as long as the model with the flag is not Down or Out of Action. 
Requires one hand to use. 


Martyrdom Pills 
Martyrdom pills are a potent mixture of mind-altering drugs and chemicals that inure a soldier against all pain and 
injury. However, it takes a tremendous toll on the body. 


Rules: Before the battle begins, a model may use this item. If it does, injuries rolled against it suffer -1 DICE until 
the end of the battle and the model is not affected by FEAR. Keywords: CONSUMABLE. 


Unholy Trinket 
Rules: When a model equipped with an Unholy Trinket fails a RISKY ACTION, that model may use this item. If it 
does, its Activation is not ended. Keyword: CONSUMABLE. 


120 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Unholy Relic 
An artefact bestowed with unholy power. Examples include Nephilim heads, desecrated splinters of the True Cross or 
mummified body parts of fallen saints and bishops. 


Rules: A model equipped with an Unholy relic radiates a truly malignant aura and causes FEAR. 


Blessed Icon 
Small icons of saints, great angels and holy warriors are a common sight amongst the Trench Pilgrims. They are hung on 
rosaries, belts, or attached to portable shrines carried on the Pilgrims’ backs. 


Rules: When a model equipped with a Blessed Icon fails a RISKY ACTION, that model may use this item. If it does, 
its Activation is not ended. Can be used once per battle. 


Infernal Brand Mark 
A Heretic who has made a Holy Pilgrimage into Hell itself is branded by their patron devil with an ever-burning mark. 
Mortal fire no longer has the power to harm them. 


Rules: Negates the extra BLOOD MARKER from attacks with the keyword FIRE. Any such attacks suffer -1 DICE 
penalty to all injury rolls. 


Field Shrine 
Holy reliquaries, blessed artefacts and sacred crosses are often carried to the battlefield to encourage the troops, while the 
Heretics bring idols of the Golden Calf, tortured captives or other wicked totems to bear. 


Rules: Can be placed on the battlefield in your deployment zone. Acts as three models for Morale Tests. It has a base 
size of 40mm. Can be destroyed if any type of attack hits it. 


Hellbound Soul Contract 
An infernal contract signed by a Heretic and the devil who will come to collect the damned soul when death is close. The 
mortal signatory bursts into infernal flames when seriously wounded. 


Rules: When this model is taken Out of Action, any model in melee combat with them immediately suffers +1 
BLOOD MARKER unless the model ignores damage from sources with the Keyword FIRE. 


Binoculars 
It is quite common for officers to carry finely-crafted battlefield binoculars with them on the battlefield to survey the land 
ahead, spot hidden enemy troops and observe any sign of movement. 


Rules: Any enemy Infiltrator cannot be placed closer than 16” of this model. 


Musical Instrument 
Horns, drums, trumpets, whistles, bagpipes and many other types of instruments are used extensively in the battles of the 
Great War. They can bolster the hearts of those facing the horrors of Hell – or they can recite terrifying hymns praising the 
lords of the Inferno! 


Rules: Any friendly models within 4” of the musician who is not Down can add +1 DICE to their Dash ACTIONS. 
Musical Instruments take one hand to use at all times as if it were a weapon. 


Mountaineer Kit 
This kit includes ropes, carabiners, slings, mountaineering harness and pitons to aid a soldier in overcoming almost any 
vertical obstacle. 


Rules: A model with this kit adds +1 DICE to any Climbing ACTION rolls. 


121 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenarios 


Table Size 


Battles are fought on a table with 4’ x 4’ dimensions. 
The scenario will always indicate clearly if the table size 
differs from this. 


Setting up Terrain 


Unless the Scenario states otherwise, use the following 
rules to set up the scenarios. The player with the lower 
number of models in their force can place one of the 
following terrain pieces on the table: 


; One Building (a tower, house etc.) 
; One Piece of Dangerous Terrain (swamp, barbed 
wire etc.) 
; One Piece of Difficult Terrain (forest, rocky 
ground) 
; One Piece of Impassable terrain (12” river with a 
bridge or ford, sheer cliffs etc.) Maximum two pieces 
per battle 
; One Hill 
; One Fence/Wall/other defendable terrain piece 
(max one per player) 
; 6” Section of a Trench 


Each building must be placed: 


; at least 8” away from any table edge and 
; at least 6” away from the nearest building terrain 
piece. 


In addition, both players should add six smaller 
terrain pieces like boxes, sandbags, bomb craters, wells, 
fountains etc. anywhere on the table to create additional 
cover. 


Objective Markers 


Some Scenarios use Objective Markers. You can use 
flags, coins, banners, beads or other suitable pieces for 
these markers. 


Before the Battle and 
Pre-Battle Abilities 


Many abilities instruct (or offer) the chance to take 
an action before the battle begins. These are called 
Pre-Battle Abilities. Unless otherwise stated, Pre-Battle 
Abilities are activated and resolved after forces have been 
assembled and the terrain has been set up, but before 
models have been deployed. 


If both players have Pre-Battle Abilities to resolve at 
the same time, each player resolves a single Pre-Battle 
Ability at a time in alternating order, starting with the 
player who will have the first turn. If multiple Pre- 
Battle Abilities belonging to the same player need to be 
resolved at the same time, the player that they belong to 
may resolve them in any order that they please (unless 
the abilities specify that they must be activated in a 
specific order). If one player has resolved all of their 
Pre-Battle Abilities, the other player may resolve the 
remainder of theirs. 


Victory Points 


Victory Points (VPs) are used to determine who wins 
and loses a battle in most scenarios. VPs are often 
awarded for objectives specific to the scenario you are 
playing and this is clearly explained in the scenario itself. 


If you are playing the Campaign, the winner always gains 
5 VPs if otherwise the result would indicate less. 


Duration of the Game 


A typical game lasts for six Game Turns. Some scenarios 
have a different duration. These cases are always clearly 
indicated in the rules for the scenario. 


122 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 1: 
Claim No Man’s Land 


123 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Forces 


Use your full Campaign Warband in this battle. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). 


The Table must contain five buildings such as ruined 
houses, bunkers, chapels etc. At least part of each 
building must be in the location indicated on the map 
with a Red Marker. These buildings are the Objectives of 
the scenario and score Victory Points (VPs). 


Fill the rest of the battlefield in the usual way. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators cannot be used in this Scenario. 


Deployment 


The players roll-off. The loser of the roll-off chooses 
which deployment zone will be theirs. The other 
deployment zone will be their opponent’s. 


The players then take it in turns to deploy one model at 
a time, starting with the player who has more models in 
their warband (roll-off if both have the same number of 
models). 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


Battle Length 


The battle lasts for four turns. 


Victory Conditions 


Keep a running tally of Victory Points for both sides. 
The players accumulate VPs as follows: 


; At the end of each turn, a player scores one VP 
for each Objective building that they have a model 
within 1” of or two VPs for each Objective building 
that they control. 
; A player controls an Objective if the total 
number of models from their warband that are 
wholly within that building is higher than the total 
number of enemy models within 1” of the Objective 
building. A model is considered wholly within 
a building if it is entirely within the edges of the 
building’s footprint, as agreed by the players. 
; Calculate VPs for both players and the end of the 
round and add them together. The player with the 
higher number of VPs wins, otherwise the game is 
a draw. 


Glorious Deeds 


Players score one Glory Point for every model that 
completes any of the following Glorious Deeds. Victory 
Points for these can only be gained once – whichever 
player completes them first gets the Glory! 


; Sniper: Take out an enemy ELITE in Cover with 
a shooting attack at Long Range. 
; Lord of War: Take two or more enemy models 
Out of Action in a single turn with melee attacks 
with one of your own models. 
; Cast them Down: Make an enemy fall from 
a height of 3” or more thanks to your action 
(shooting, melee, Supernatural Power etc.). 
; Bloodletting: Make one of your enemies suffer 
a sixth BLOOD MARKER with an attack from one of 
your models. 
; Hold your Ground: Pass a Morale Test. 
; Suicidal Bravery: Charge two enemy models 
with one of yours during a single Activation. 
; Resist and Bite: Take out an enemy with a model 
that is Down. 


124 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 2: 
Relic Hunt 


125 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Forces 


Both players select up to six models from their warband. 
No models on 40mm+ sized bases can be included. 
If your warband must contain a specific model upon 
creation, you may field that model even if it would be 
excluded by this restriction. 


At the start of turn two, both players receive D3 
randomly selected models from their warband as 
reinforcements. These reinforcements are placed 
anywhere along the player’s own table edge but at least 
8” away from any enemy models. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). 


Place six markers representing Reliquaries on the table as 
indicated on the map, numbered one to six. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators can be used in this Scenario. 


Deployment 


The players roll-off. The loser of the roll-off chooses 
which deployment zone will be theirs. The other 
deployment zone will be their opponent’s. 


The players then take it in turns to deploy one model at 
a time, starting with the player who has more models in 
their warband (roll-off if both have the same number of 
models). 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


Battle Length 


The battle lasts for four turns. 


Victory Conditions 


Keep a running tally of Victory Points for both sides. 
The players accumulate VPs as follows: 


; No Morale tests are taken during this scenario. 
; A player scores one VP when they have models 
touching one of the Reliquary markers and make 
a successful ACTION roll. Once the VP is claimed, 
flip the marker over to show it has been claimed this 
turn. It can no longer generate VPs this turn for you 
or your opponent. 
; Maximum VPs that can be claimed per turn is 
four. 
; After Turn 1 is over, remove Reliquary Markers 
1 and 2 from the table. Flip any claimed Reliquary 
Markers over to indicate they can be claimed again 
this Turn. 
; After Turn 2 is over, remove Reliquary Markers 
3 and 4 from the table. Flip any claimed Reliquary 
Markers over to indicate they can be claimed again 
this Turn. 
; On Turn 4 the final two Reliquary Markers 
(5 and 6) are worth 2 VPs each when claimed 
successfully. 
; Calculate VPs for both players and the end of 
each Turn and add them together. The player with 
the higher number of VPs wins, otherwise the game 
is a draw. 


Glorious Deeds 


Players score one Glory Point for every model that 
completes any of the following Glorious Deeds. Victory 
Points for these can only be gained once – whichever 
player completes them first gets the Glory! 


; Sniper: Take out an enemy ELITE in Cover with 
a shooting attack at Long Range. 
; Cast them Down: Make an enemy fall from 
a height of 3”+ thanks to your action (shooting, 
melee, Supernatural Power etc.). 
; Blood Sacrifice: One of your models takes at 
least three enemies out of action during the battle. 
; Resist and Bite: Take out an enemy with a model 
that is Down. 
; Relic Hunter: One of your models claims at least 
two different Reliquary Markers during the game. 
; Protect the Relic: Take out an enemy that is 
touching one of the Reliquary Markers. 


126 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 3: 
Hunt for Heroes 


127 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Forces 


Both forces can use up to 20 models from their warband. 
Each player must deploy all their ELITE models if they 
are able. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). 


Place three markers representing Objectives on the table 
as indicated on the map, numbered one to six. 


Fill the rest of the battlefield with terrain in the usual 
way. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators can be used in this Scenario. 


Deployment 


The players roll-off. The loser of the roll-off chooses 
which deployment zone will be theirs. The other 
deployment zone will be their opponent’s. 


The players then take it in turns to deploy one model at 
a time, starting with the player who has more models in 
their warband (roll-off if both have the same number of 
models). 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


Battle Length 


The battle lasts for four turns. 


Special Objectives 


After the deployment, in secret, both players nominate 
three enemy ELITE models as targets to be eliminated 
(unless the opponent has a smaller number of ELITES 
in which case nominate all of them). Each player also 


nominates one of their own ELITE models that must 
be kept alive until the end of the game. These score 
additional Victory Points at the end of the game as 
follows. 


Victory Conditions 


Keep a running tally of Victory Points for both sides. 
The players accumulate VPs as follows: 


; At the end of each Turn, a player scores one VP if 
they have models within 1” of any of the Objective 
buildings or two VPs if they control the Objective at 
the end of the Turn. 
; A player controls an Objective if the total 
number of models from their warband, that are 
wholly within that building, is higher than the total 
number of enemy models within 1” of the Objective 
building. A model is considered wholly within 
a building if it is entirely within the edges of the 
building as agreed by the players. 
; When the game ends, both players reveal the 
hidden target models. 
; For each enemy ELITE on their list that was 
taken Out of Action, the player scores 2 VPs. 
; If the ELITE model they indicated as the 
friendly model to be kept alive has not been 
taken Out of Action at the end of the game, the 
controlling player scores 3 VPs. 
; Calculate VPs for both players and the end of the 
game and add them together. The player with the 
higher number of VPs wins, otherwise the game is 
a draw. 


Glorious Deeds 


Players score one Glory Point for every model that 
completes any of the following Glorious Deeds. Victory 
Points for these can only be gained once – whichever 
player completes them first gets the Glory! 


; Kill their Leaders: Take out all the ELITES you 
nominated as targets. 
; Death From Above: Take out an enemy with 
a melee attack ACTION benefitting from a Diving 
Charge. 
; King of the Hill: Control all three Objectives at 
the same time. 
; Hold Your Ground: Pass a Morale Test. 
; High Risk, High Reward: Your nominated 
model to be kept alive takes out one of the target 
enemy ELITES. 


128 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 4: 
Trench Warfare 


Forces 


The larger warband is the Attacker and they use their 
entire warband. The smaller warband is the Defender 
and they can have up to half of the number of models the 
Attacker has. If both warbands have the same number of 
models, roll a dice to see who the attacker is and who the 
defender is. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized Battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). 


Trenches 


The Defender places three 8”-long Trench sections 
in their Deployment Zone. They can be placed as the 
Defender wishes and can be continuous, but each section 
always counts separately for Victory Points (see below). 


Fill the rest of the battlefield with terrain in the usual 
way. 


Mines 


The Defender then places 12 mine markers on the 
battlefield, four which will be duds – the defender marks 


129 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Otherwise, keep a running tally of Victory Points for 
both sides. The players accumulate VPs as follows: 


; At the end of the battle, the defender scores 2 
victory points for each trench section that has one 
of the defender’s models and no enemies in it. The 
defender scores 1 VP for each trench section that has 
one of their models, but also has one or more enemy 
models. 
; At the end of the battle, the Attacker scores 2 
VPs for each trench section that has one or more 
of their models, but also has one or more enemy 
models. 
; At the end of the battle the Attacker scores 3 VPs 
for each trench section that has one or more of their 
models but no enemy models. Calculate VPs at the 
end each turn for both players and the end of the 
game and add them together. The player with the 
higher number of VPs wins, otherwise the game is 
a draw. 


Glorious Deeds 


Players score one Glory Point for every model that 
completes any of the following Glorious Deeds. Glory 
Points for these can only be gained once - whichever 
player completes them first gets the Glory Points! 


; Survive to Tell the Tale: A model is hit by two 
mines during the battle and is not taken Out of 
Action. 
; Into the Trenches!: Charge an enemy model in 
a trench and take it Out of Action during the same 
turn. 
; Headshot: Retreat from melee combat with an 
enemy and then take them out with a ranged attack 
ACTION during the same Activation. 
; Good Hunting: Take out an enemy in a trench 
with a ranged attack at Long Range. 
; Throw them Back: As a Defender, take an 
enemy in a trench Out of Action when there were 
no defenders in the trench before you activated the 
model that takes the enemy out. 
; Hold the Line: Pass a Morale Test. 


the duds on the side of the marker that is hidden from 
view (face down). The Defender can place the mines 
anywhere within the battlefield up to 12” away from 
their own Deployment Zone as shown, though not 
inside their own deployment zone. When any model 
comes within 2” of the centre of a mine counter (players 
can measure this distance beforehand), flip the counter 
over to see if it is a dud or not. If the mine is a dud, 
discard it immediately. If the mine is not a dud, every 
model within 3” must immediately roll on the Injury 
Chart to see what happens as a result of the exploding 
mine. The mines have the Keyword SHRAPNEL, so 
the models hit by the mine blast suffer an additional 
BLOOD MARKER unless they have protection against 
this. Afterwards, remove the mine marker. It is possible 
to trigger more than one mine at the time. 


Some models, such as New Antioch Combat Engineers 
can remove a mine counter by moving in base contact 
with it and passing a RISKY ACTION as indicated in 
their warband entry. Note that when a model attempts 
this, the mine does not explode until the result of the 
roll is determined. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators can be used in this scenario. However, the 
Attacker cannot place their infiltrators closer than 12” of 
their own deployment zone. 


Deployment 


The players then take turns to deploy one model at a 
time, starting with the attacker. 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


Battle Length 


At the end of the fourth turn, the Attacker rolls1D6. On 
a roll of 1-2, the battle ends. Otherwise the game lasts 
for five turns. 


Victory Conditions 


If one warband is wiped out completely or loses their 
Morale test, the game ends and the opposing warband 
wins. 


130 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 5: 
Great War 


131 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Forces 


Both sides use their entire forces. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized Battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). 


Fill the battlefield with terrain in the usual way. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators can be used in this Scenario. 


Deployment 


The players then take turns to deploy one model at a 
time, starting with the attacker. 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


Battle Length 


The battle lasts for five turns. 


Morale 


This is a fight to the finish, so a failed Morale Test will 
not end the battle. Instead, any warband that fails their 
Morale Test will be shaken instead. It is possible for both 
warbands to be shaken. 


Victory Conditions 


If one warband is wiped out completely the opposing 
warband wins. Otherwise, keep a running tally of 
Victory Points for both sides. The players accumulate 
Victory Points as follows: 


; By taking out enemies you earn VPs equal to the 
ducat value of the model (including any equipment) 
divided 10, rounding any fractions up to the nearest 
full number. 
; Mercenaries & Allies are worth three times their 
Glory Points cost as Victory Points. 
; Glorious equipment is worth three times the 
Glory Points cost of the equipment as Victory 
Points 


Glorious Deeds 


Since this scenario ends the Campaign, there is no 
further need to acquire Glory Points. 


132 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 6: 
Supply Raid 


133 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Forces 


The players roll-off. The winner can decide to be either 
the Attacker or the Defender. 


The Defender selects up to six models from their 
warband. The Attacker selects up to 6+D3 models from 
their warband. 


At the beginning of turn two, both players receive 
D3 randomly selected models from the rest of their 
warband as reinforcements. These reinforcements are 
placed anywhere along the player’s own table edge but 
at least 8” away from any enemy models. Once the 
player has deployed their entire warband, no further 
reinforcements can be deployed. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). 


Fill the rest of the battlefield with terrain in the usual 
way. 


Starting with the Defender, players then take turns to 
place an Objective Marker until each player has placed 
three markers. Each Objective Marker must be more 
than 6” away from other Objective Markers and 6” away 
from the edge of the battlefield. Only one Objective 
Marker can be placed in the Defender’s Deployment 
Zone and none in the Attacker’s. These represent the 
Defender’s supplies that the Attacker is trying to destroy. 


The Attacker treats the Objective Markers exactly as 
enemy models and they can be charged, attacked and 
shot at. The supplies can be destroyed by any melee 
attack that hits them, or a ranged attack that hits them 
from a weapon with the Keyword ACTION. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators can be used in this Scenario. 


Deployment 


Starting with the Defender, the players take turns to 
deploy one model at a time. 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 


Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


Battle Length 


The battle lasts for four turns. 


Victory Conditions 


If one warband fails its Morale Test, the game ends in an 
outright victory for their opponent. 


Keep a running tally of Victory Points for both sides. 
The players accumulate VPs as follows: 


; 1 VP is gained per enemy model taken Out of 
Action. 
; The Attacker gains 1 VP for each Objective 
Marker that is destroyed. 
; At the end of the battle, the Defender gains 2 
VPs for each Objective that remains on the table. 
; Calculate VPs for both players and the end of the 
battle and add them together. The player with the 
higher number of VPs wins, otherwise the game is 
a draw. 


Glorious Deeds 


Players score one Glory Point for every model that 
completes any of the following Glorious Deeds. Glory 
Points for these can only be gained once – whichever 
player completes them first gets the Glory Points! 


; Daring Raid: The Attacker completes this 
Glorious Deed if they destroy one Objective Marker 
in the opponent’s Deployment Zone. 
; Rampage: The Attacker completes this Glorious 
Deed if a single model destroys 2+ Objective 
Markers. 
; Hold your Ground: Pass a Morale Test. 
; Stop Them in Their Tracks: The Defender 
completes this Glorious Deed if they take an enemy 
model Out of Action in the Attacker’s Deployment 
Zone. 
; Victory of Death: Win the battle. 
; Save the Supplies!: The Defender completes this 
Glorious Deed if four or more supplies are left at the 
end of the fourth turn. 


134 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario 7: 
Storming the Shores 


135 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Forces 


Use your full campaign warband in this battle. Roll off 
to see which force is the Attacker and which one is the 
Defender. 


The Battlefield 


The game is played on a standard-sized Battlefield (we 
suggest 4’ x 4’). Fill the battlefield with terrain in the 
usual way. 


Infiltrators 


Infiltrators can be used in this scenario, but they cannot 
be within 8” of any of the Defence Works (see below). 


Deployment 


The Defender chooses which deployment zone will 
be theirs. The other deployment zone will be their 
opponent’s. 


The players then take it in turns to deploy one model at 
a time, starting with the player who has more models in 
their warband (roll-off if both have the same number of 
models). 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
The Defender then deploys three Defence Works 
(sandbags, barricades, low wall etc.), each of which 
counts as a defended obstacle and is at least 4” long 
vertically. They are max 1” high. 


; Within 18” of the centre of the battlefield 
(measure to the centre). 
; At least 12” from another Defence Work 
(measured from the centre). 
; Not within or surrounded by impassable terrain. 


Battle Length 


The battle lasts for four turns. 


Victory Conditions 


The game ends when one of the following conditions is 
met: 


; The Defender controls all Defence Works at the 
start of the battle. The Attacker can destroy one of 
the Defence Works by having more fighters than 
the defender within 3” of the centre of one of the 
Defence Works at the end of any turn. When this 
happens, remove the terrain piece. Once destroyed, 
it is permanently claimed by the Attacker. At the end 
of any turn when all three landmarks are captured by 
the Attacker. 
; When one warband loses their Morale Test and 
retreats. 
; One warband is completely wiped out. 
; Battle ends on turn four and the Defender still 
controls one or more of the Defence Works. 


If you are playing a Campaign, the Winner gains 5 
Victory Points. 


Glorious Deeds 


Players score one Glory Point for every model that 
completes any of the following Glorious Deeds. Glory 
Points for these can only be gained once – whichever 
player completes them first gets the Glory Points! 


; Feigned Retreat: Retreat from melee combat 
and then shoot and hit the enemy you escaped from 
during the same Activation. 
; Running the Gauntlet: In single Activation, 
Dash and Charge an enemy that is within 3” of one 
of the Defence Works. 
; Last Ditch Effort: Take out an enemy with the 
last model you Activate during any of your turns. 
; Onto the Breach: Take out an enemy in 
melee who is using one of the Defence Works as a 
Defended Obstacle. 
; Hold your Ground: Pass a Morale Test. 
; Barrage: Take out an enemy with a weapon that 
has one of the following Keywords: FIRE, GAS, 
SHRAPNEL. 


136 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Terrain 


Set up terrain as explained in the terrain section of the 
book. It is important for any battlefield to have enough 
terrain to block Line of Sight at regular intervals so that 
the game does not turn into a battle where only long- 
range weapons matter. Both players should set up an 
equal number of terrain pieces. 


Game Length 


At the end of the fifth turn of the game, one of the 
players rolls a D6. If the result is 4 or more, the game 
ends. If the game continues, the game ends at the end of 
the sixth turn. 


Roll for Scenario Type 


After terrain has been placed, either player rolls a D6 
and consults the chart below to determine the victory 
conditions for the game. Note that if you are playing the 
campaign, the winner always gains 5 Victory Points if 
otherwise the result would indicate less. 


Scenario Chart (roll a D6) 


1 
ATTRITIONAL BATTLE 
2 
TAKE AND HOLD 
3 
SABOTAGE 
4 
OVER THE TOP 
5 
BREAKTHROUGH 
6 
RETRIEVE 


Random Scenario 
Generator 


These rules can be used to generate either one-off or 
Campaign scenarios on the fly. To Generate a Scenario, 
follow these steps: 


1. One player rolls for Scenario type on the chart 
below. 


2. One player rolls for Deployment type on the 
chart below. 


3. Both players roll for Glorious Deeds on the charts 
below. 


4. Players set up Terrain according to the 
instructions. 


5. Players deploy their troops according to 
instructions. 


6. Determine the Length of the Game as detailed 
below. 



Setting Up 


Unless the scenario instructs otherwise, the players take 
it in turns to deploy one model at a time, starting with 
the player who has more models in their warband (roll- 
off if both have the same number of models). 


Models must be set up wholly within their own 
deployment zone. If a player runs out of models to set 
up, the other player sets up all their models afterwards. 
Once the players have set up their models, deployment 
ends and the battle begins. 


When a model that is not set up on the playing area 
moves onto the table, measure the move from its entry 
point as determined in the scenario. 


137 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Scenario Objective 1: 
Attritional Battle 


At the end of the game, each player totals up the ducat 
value of their enemy models that they have taken Out 
of Action and divides the number by 100, rounding any 
fractions up to find the number of Victory Points each 
player has scored. Troops bought with Glory Points are 
worth 30 ducats per Glory Point for this calculation. The 
highest scoring player wins. You gain +1 Victory Point 
for each enemy you kill on the opposing half of the table 
from your own. 


Scenario Objective 2: 
Take and Hold 


Each player rolls D3+1 and takes that many 1” radius 
Objective markers. The player with the most objective 
markers (or the winner of a roll-off, if both players have 
the same number of markers) begins by placing one of 
their Objective markers on the playing surface. Then 
the opponent does the same and they keep alternating 
until both players have placed all of their Objective 
markers. Objective markers can be placed anywhere on 
the playing surface outside Impassable Terrain, and more 
than 8” away from another marker, table edge or any 
Deployment Zone. If it becomes impossible to place any 
more markers, the remaining markers are discarded. 


To hold an objective, a player must have a model within 
3” of the marker and there must be no enemy models 
at all within 3” of the same marker. If either of these 
conditions is not met, that objective is not held by any 
player. 


After the game ends, the players determine how many 
objectives they control. The player with the most 
objective markers wins. If they hold the same number of 
objectives, the game is a draw. 


Scenario Objective 3: 
Sabotage 


Each player places objectives, as described for Mission 
2. Then the players roll-off and the winner decides to be 
the attacker or defender. During the game, the attacker 
can destroy the objectives by planting mines/demolition 
charges or other explosives on them. 


To plant an explosive charge on an objective, any 
attacking model must first move into base contact with 


the objective marker and then use any melee attack 
ACTION they have on the objective – this automatically 
plants the charges and the Activation of the model 
ends. In any following turn, if the attacking model 
is activated and moves away from the marker, the 
objective is automatically destroyed and any other model 
(friends and foes) that is still in base contact with the 
objective must immediately roll on the Injury Chart 
while ignoring armour. If the model moves away from 
the marker or is taken Out of Action before its next 
Activation, the explosive charge does not go off. 
After the game ends, if the attacker has destroyed more 
objectives than their opponent, the Attacker wins. If less, 
then the Attacker loses. If both players have destroyed 
exactly the same number of the objectives, the game is a 
draw. 


Infiltrators must be deployed as normal troops. 


Scenario Objective 4: 
Over the Top 


Both players place four 8”+ long trench sections in their 
own deployment zone, at least 3” away from the nearest 
other trench. At the end of the battle, players score 1 
Victory Point for each of their own trenches they hold 
where there are no enemy models in the same trench 
section. They gain 1 Victory Point for each enemy trench 
they have that has at least one of their own models and 2 
VPs if there are no enemy models in the trench. 


If you roll a Chance Encounter as a Deployment type, 
roll again until you get a different one. 


Scenario Objective 5: 
Breakthrough 


After rolling for setup type, and just before starting the 
Setup Warbands step, the players roll off and the winner 
picks any of the four table edges for their opponent to 
escape from. Then the opponent does the same, but 
they cannot pick the same table edge picked by the first 
player. 


Any model that moves into contact with the ‘extraction 
point,’ which is the point in the exact centre of the 
chosen table edge, is removed and counts as escaped. If 
enemy models are placed to block the extraction point, 
models can escape as near as possible to the extraction 
point, on either side of the blocking models. 


At the end of the game, each player totals up the 


138 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


ducat value of their own models that have escaped the 
battlefield and divides the number by 100, rounding any 
fractions up to find the number of Victory Points each 
player has scored. Troops bought with Glory Points are 
worth 30 ducats per Glory Point for this calculation. The 
highest scoring player wins. 


Scenario Objective 6: 
Retrieve 


Move the area of dense terrain (of at least 6” x 6” and 
that is closest to the centre of the table) so that it is in the 
centre of the table, and then place an objective marker 
on it, exactly in the centre of the table. This marker 
represents a small object, like relic or an artefact, lost 
experimental weapon etc. 


During the game, any model that ends its move in 
contact with the marker picks it up. That model is now 
carrying the object and will carry it until it leaves the 
table or is destroyed. As long as it is carrying the object, 
the model cannot Attack and cannot Dash and no other 
method of movement (teleportation, Puppet Master 
etc.) can be used to move the model due the mystical 
effect of the relic! At the end of its activation, the model 
can pass the object to any friendly model within 1” 
range, as long as neither model is in melee combat with 
an enemy. The model receiving the object is considered 
to have ended their Activation this turn, if it has not 
have done so yet. 


If the model carrying the object is taken Out of Action 
the object is immediately thrown D6” in a direction 
indicated by the opposing player, though never out of 
the battlefield. Stop if the object moves into contact with 
Impenetrable Terrain just outside it. If it lands on top 
of a model, the model immediately picks it up, except if 
there is also an enemy model in melee combat with it, in 
which case it is thrown again. 


If the model carrying the object moves into contact with 
any table edge, it has escaped with the object and the 
player immediately wins the game. 


If the game ends while a model is carrying the object, 
the players roll off with D6 one last time. If the player 
controlling the model carrying the objective wins the 
roll-off, they win the game. In any other case, the game 
is a draw. 


Infiltrators must be deployed as normal troops. 


Roll for Deployment Type 


The player that did not roll for Missions rolls a D6 and 
consults the chart below to determine how the warbands 
deploy for the game. 


1. Chance Encounter 


The players roll-off and the winner chooses which long 
table side belongs to them (or any edge if you are playing 
on a square area). The opponent gets the opposite 
table edge (see diagram). Models are not set up on 
the table at the start of the game. Instead, on the first 
turn of the game, half of the warband (selected by each 
player) enters the battlefield. When one of the models 
is activated, it starts its move onto the table from any 
point along the player’s table edge, though it cannot be 
deployed directly into melee combat. In turn two, the 
rest of the warband is deployed exactly the same way. 


The scenario with Chance Encounter deployment lasts 
for a minimum of six turns. 


Deployment Type Chart 
(roll a D6) 


1 
CHANCE ENCOUNTER 
2 
STANDARD DEPLOYMENT 
3 
FLANK ATTACK 
4 
LONG-DISTANCE BATTLE 
5 
TUNNELS 
6 
FOG OF WAR 


139 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


2. Standard Deployment 


The players roll-off and the winner chooses which table 
edge belongs to them. The opponent gets the opposite 
table edge. 


3. Flank Attack 


Use the Flank Attack Deployment Map below. The 
winner of the roll-off then places one model anywhere 
within their Deployment Zone (see diagram). The 
opponent does the same. Then the first player places 
another model and the two keep alternating until all 
models have been set up. 


4. Long-distance Battle 


The players roll-off and the winner chooses which corner 
of the table belongs to them. The opponent gets the 
opposite corner. The winner of the roll-off then places 
one model anywhere within 12” of their table corner 
(see diagram). The opponent does the same. Then the 


first player places another model and the two keep 
alternating until all models have been set up. Battles with 
this deployment last a minimum of six Turns. 


5. Tunnels 


The players roll-off and the winner places a 1” Tunnel 
Marker anywhere that is more than 6” from the table’s 
middle line (see diagram), though not on Impassable 
Terrain. Their opponent does the same on the opposite 
side of the table’s middle line. 


Not all models are set up on the table at the start of the 
game. Players must leave half of their models in reserve 
(rounding down). On the first turn of the game, the 
remaining models enter the battle through tunnels 
– when one of these models is Activated, it is placed 
anywhere within 6” of its Tunnel Marker, though not in 
melee combat. Models that enter the battlefield this way 
cannot Dash in the first turn of the game. 


Infiltrators are deployed as normal troops in this 
deployment type. 


140 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


6. Fog of War 


The players roll-off and the winner chooses which table 
side belongs to them. Their opponent gets the opposite 
table edge (see diagram) and both deploy normally. 
Not all models are set up on the table at the start of the 
game. Players must leave half of their models in reserve 
(rounding down). 


On the first turn of the game, the remaining models 
enter the battle at random locations – when one of these 
models is Activated, the player rolls a D6 and consults 
the Fog of War Chart below. The chart details from 
which table edge the model enters. Models entering the 
battle cannot be placed directly into melee combat. 


Fog of War Chart 
Roll one D6 and consult the following chart: 


1. Your opponent chooses one of the results below. 
2. Enter from the centre of the North edge. 
3. Enter from the centre of the East edge. 
4. Enter from the centre of the South edge. 
5. Enter from the centre of the West edge. 
6. You choose one of the results above. 


Glorious Deeds 


To determine the Glorious Deeds for the scenario, each 
player rolls two D6, one after the other. If a player rolls 
the same result on both dice, roll one of the dice again 
until it shows a different result. Match each player’s 
results to their table below. 


Finally, every scenario shares a fifth Glorious Deed: 
“Victorious: Win the Battle.” Completing any of these 
Glorious Deeds earns the player 1 Glory Point. Once 
a Glorious Deed is completed by a player, it cannot be 
completed again by either player. 


141 


TRENCH CRUSADE 
PLAYTEST RULES 


Die Result - Player 1 


1 
Reaper: Take at least three enemies Out of Action with one of your models during the battle with any ACTION 
the model has. 


2 
Sharpshooter: Take out an enemy in Cover while shooting from Long Range. Auto-hit weapons, grenades and 
weapons with a blast radius do not count. 


3 
Bloodletting: Inflict a sixth BLOOD MARKER on any enemy with an attack from one of your models. 


4 
Feigned Retreat: Retreat from Melee Combat and then shoot and hit the enemy you escaped from during the same 
Activation. 


5 
Fickle Luck: Use 2+ BLOOD MARKERS on a single enemy to give one of their ACTIONS -2 DICE (or more). 


6 
Head-hunter: Take two enemies Out of Action with Ranged attacks with a single model. 


Die Result - Player 2 


1 
Risk It All: Succeed in two or more RISKY ACTIONS with one model during a single Activation. 


2 
Live Dangerously: Retreat from Melee Combat twice with one model during the game. 


3 
Killer Instinct: Take two enemies Out of Action with one model in melee during the battle. 


4 
No Escape: Successfully charge an enemy you cannot see. 


5 
Cast Them Down: Make an enemy fall from a height of 3”+ due to your action (shooting, melee, Supernatural Power 
etc). 


6 
Show of Mercy: Retreat from Melee Combat with an enemy that is Down. 


