: 





Magico-Religious Groups 
and Ritualistic Activities 


A Guide for First Responders 


Tony M. Kail 





Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 


CRC Press 

Taylor & Francis Group 

6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300 
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 


© 2008 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business 


No claim to original U.S. Government works 
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper 
10987654321 


International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4200-5186-5 (Hardcover) 


This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted 
material is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are 
listed. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author 
and the publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the conse- 
quences of their use. 


No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any 
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written 
permission from the publishers. 


For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www. 
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that 
provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a 
photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged. 


Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and 
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 





Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 





Kail, Tony M. 
Magico-religious groups and ritualistic activities : a guide for first responders / 
Tony M. Kail. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-4200-5186-5 (alk. paper) 
1. Magic--Religious aspects. 2. Religion and culture. I. Title. 


BL65.M2K35 2008 
203--dc22 2007033001 


Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at 
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com 


and the CRC Press Web site at 
http://www.crcpress.com 


Contents 


Preface Xv 
Acknowledgments xvii 
Author xix 
1 Introduction 1 


First Responders 1 
View from the Patient’s Perspective 1 
Risks for First Responders 2 
Solutions 3 
References 4 
2 An Introduction to Religious Culture 
for Responders 7 
Cultural Competency 7 
Anthropological Terms 9 
Magico-Religious Cultures 10 
References 11 
3 Neopaganism 13 
Beliefs and Practices 13 
Neopaganism 14 
History of Wicca 15 
Traditions 16 
Alexandrian Wicca 16 
British Traditional Wicca 16 
Celtic Wicca 16 
Dianic Wicca 16 
Eclectic Wicca 16 
Gardenarian Wicca 16 
Georgian Wicca 17 
Hereditary Wicca 17 
Mohsian Tradition 17 


Strega Tradition 17 


iii 


iv 


Contents 


Beliefs 17 
Deities of Wicca 18 
Ethics 18 
Group Structure 19 
Ritual Tools 20 
Rituals and Ceremonies 21 
Correspondences 21 
Preparation of Ritual Area 22 
Consecration of Ritual Tools and Implements 22 
Grounding 22 
Casting the Circle 22 
Calling the Quarters 23 
Invocation of Deity 23 
Energy Is Raised 24 
Spellwork 24 
Cakes/Wine 24 
Opening and Banishment of the Circle 24 
Rites of Passage 24 
Holy Days 25 
Samhain 25 
Yule 25 
Imbolc 25 
Ostara 26 
Beltane 26 
Litha 26 
Lammas 26 
Mabon 26 
Sacred Spaces 26 
Health and Sickness 29 
Cord Healing 29 
Aromatherapy 29 
Chanting 29 
Auric Healing 29 
Chakras 31 
Absent Healing 31 
Herbalism 31 
Ritual Body Art 33 
Smudging 34 
Candles 34 
Destruction of Illness 35 
Articles of Comfort 36 
Source of Sickness 37 


Taboos 37 


Contents 


Responder Issues 
Weapons/Harmful Implements 
References 


4 Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 


History of Santeria 
Beliefs and Practices 
The Deities of Santeria 
Elegua 
Ogun 
Ochosi 
Oshun 
Obatala 
Chango 
Oya 
Yemaya 
Babalu-Aye 
Olokun 
Orula/Orunmila 
Osain 
The Ibejis 
Aganyu 
Inle 
Oko 
The Ancestors 
Group Structure 
Rituals and Ceremonies 
Receiving the Necklaces 
Warriors 
Cofa 
Kariocha 
Obi 
Diloggun 
Patakis 
Offerings and Sacrifices 
Addimu 
Ebbo 
Trance Possession 
Espiritismo 
Brujeria 
Holy Days 
Itutu 


38 
39 
39 


41 


41 
43 
43 
43 
45 
45 
45 
45 
45 
45 
46 
46 
46 
47 
47 
47 
47 
48 
48 
48 
49 
50 
50 
52 
52 
53 
54 
56 
56 
56 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 


vi 


Contents 


Sacred Spaces 62 
Healing and Sickness 62 
Methods of Healing 63 
Santeria Herbalism 64 
Mercury 66 
Articles of Comfort 66 
Idé 66 
Macuto 66 
Responder Issues 67 
References 69 
Palo and Kongo Religions 71 
Bantu Traditions 71 
Bantu Religious Elements 72 
Beliefs and Practices 73 
Nganga: The Cauldron 75 
Bones 75 
Sacred Spaces 76 
Lucero 78 
Siete Rayos 78 
Zarabanda 78 
Mama Sholan 78 
Centelle Ndoki 79 
Tiembla Tierra 79 
Madre de Agua 80 
Francisco and Francisca 80 
Seven Congos 80 
Group Structure 80 
Rituals and Ceremonies 81 
Divination 81 
Sacrifices 81 
Initiation 82 
Herbalism 84 
Articles of Comfort 85 
Healing and Sickness 86 
Responder Issues 86 
References 87 
Voodoo 89 
Beliefs and Practices 89 
Rada 90 


Legba 90 


Contents 


Marasa 
Loko 
Ayizan 
Sobo 
Agassou 

La Sirene 
Azaka 
Damballah Wedo 
Ayida Wedo 
Ezili Freda 
Ogou Group 
Agwe 


Petro 


Simbi 

Kalfu (Carrefour) 

Gran Bwa 

Ezili Danto (Erzulie Dantor) 
Marinette-Bwa-Chech 
Ti-Jean Petro 

Simbi 

Gede 

Baron Samedi 

Maman Brigette 

Spiritual Bodies and Guardians 


Group Structure 
Ritual Tools 


Asson 

Bottle 
Chromolithograph 
Flags 

Govi 
Packets 
Swords 
Ogan 

The Triangle 
Conch Shell 
Zins 

Drums 


Ceremonies 


Entrance 


The Priye Ginen 
Manje Loa: The Sacrifice 


Rites of Passage 


vii 


90 
91 
91 
92 
92 
92 
92 
92 
92 
92 
93 
93 
93 
93 
93 
93 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
95 
95 
95 
96 
96 
97 
97 
97 
97 
98 
98 
98 
98 
98 
98 
98 
99 
100 
100 
100 
101 


viii Contents 


Spirit Possession 101 
Initiation 102 
Marriage 102 
Zombies 102 
Sacred Days 102 
Sacred Spaces 103 
Health and Sickness 105 
Other Traditions of Voodoo 106 
Dominican Voodoo (21 Divisiones) 106 
Dahomean or West African Voodoo 106 
New Orleans Voodoo 106 
Responder Issues 107 
References 108 
7 Curanderismo 109 
Beliefs and Practices 109 
Our Lady of Guadalupe 110 
San Martin de Porres 111 
San Martin Caballero 111 
Judas Tudeo 112 
Santa Marta 113 
San Simon 113 
Jesus Malverde 113 
Juan Soldado 113 
Dr. Jose Gregorio Hernandez 113 
San Toribio Romo 113 
Santa Muerte 114 
Other Folk Saints 114 
Group Structure 115 
Healing and Sickness 117 
Methods of Healing 118 
Herbalism 119 
Objects of Healing 120 
Horseshoe Amulet 120 
Lodestone 121 
Scapulario 121 
Milagro 121 

La Manito de Coral 121 

Ojo de Venado 121 
Responder Issues 122 


Reference 124 


Contents 


8 Closing Issues 


Behavior 
Language 
Patience 
Communication 
References 


Glossary of Cultural Terms 
Index of Symbols 


Subject Index 


125 


125 
125 
125 
125 
126 


127 
133 
139 


List of Figures 


Figure 1.1 


Figure 1.2 


Figure 2.1 


Figure 2.2 
Figure 3.1 


Figure 3.2 
Figure 3.3 
Figure 3.4 


Figure 3.5 
Figure 3.6 


Figure 3.7 
Figure 3.8 
Figure 3.9 


Figure 3.10 
Figure 4.1 


Figure 4.2 
Figure 4.3 


Figure 4.4 
Figure 4.5 


Figure 4.6 


Figure 4.7 


The growing number of magico-religious practitioners in 
society creates new challenges for responders hoping to 
attain cultural competency. 

Cultural competency can assist responders in avoiding 
violation of cultural taboos, such as the handling of 
religious artifacts considered “sacred.” 

Identifying “family resemblances” or common concepts 
among religious cultures can assist responders in 
strategies related to communication and approach. 

The magical Law of Contact at work. 

Responders may observe images of female deities from a 
number of world religions used to represent the Goddess 
of the Wiccan religion. 

A High Priestess places a cord around the initiate. 

A Wiccan altar. 

Upon entering a residence, responders may discover 
cultural objects related to a patient’s faith as decorations. 
Figures representing the God and Goddess of Wicca. 

A ritual healing is being performed to remove negative 


energies that are causing problems in the life of the patient. 


Candle magic is practiced in many different world 
religions. 

Responders may discover tattoos and ritual body art on 
patients. 

Responders may encounter rituals performed in outdoor 
settings. 

Responders should avoid touching shrines and altars. 
Shown are various ritual artifacts representing the deities 
of the Santeria religion. 

A shrine to the Orisha Elegua. 

A statue known as Chango Macho is used in spiritual 
workings. 

The soperas of Yemaya and Oshun. 

Respect for dead ancestors is a concept found in many 
African traditional religions. 

A Santero wearing the traditional white clothing and 
Elekes of the Santeria faith. 

The Sopera contains the “secrets” of the Orishas. 


xi 


11 


15 
19 
27 


28 
28 


30 


35 


36 


37 
38 


44 
44 


46 
47 


49 


51 
54 


xii 

Figure 4.8 
Figure 4.9 
Figure 4.10 
Figure 4.11 
Figure 4.12 
Figure 5.1 
Figure 5.2 
Figure 5.3 
Figure 5.4 
Figure 5.5 


Figure 5.6 


Figure 5.7 


Figure 5.8 
Figure 5.9 
Figure 5.10 
Figure 5.11 
Figure 5.12 
Figure 6.1 
Figure 6.2 
Figure 6.3 
Figure 6.4 


Figure 6.5 
Figure 6.6 


Figure 7.1 


List of Figures 


The Orishas speak to practitioners through the coconut 
shells known as the Obi. 

The coconut shells (Obi) are “thrown” after the Orisha is 
given three drops of water. 

An example of offerings to the Orishas. 

A priestess conducts a ceremony for the Orishas. 
Responders should use caution if handling ritual objects 
during an investigation. 

The Nganga is the central vessel used in Palo Mayombe 
and other assorted Kongo faiths. 

Human bones are components that are traditionally used 
in the Nganga to represent the Nfumbe or spirits of the dead. 
The cana brava is a piece of cane or bamboo that is filled 
with mercury and sealed off. 

The working space of a Palero is shown. 

The Firma is a drawing that represents Bantu religious 
concepts, such as deities, rituals and the intention of 
practices. 

Responders may discover the presence of blood and 
remains of animals in the shrines of Palo practitioners. 
Francisco is a figure that represents deified African 
ancestors and is also used in shrines to represent the 
Mupungu Siete Rayos. 

The Chamalongos are used as a divination tool to 
communicate with the spirits inside the Nganga. 

This Nganga was discovered near the scene of a double 
homicide. 

The initiate stands on this firma to make the Pacto or 
“pact” with the dead (Nfumbe). 

Shown are bottles of the substance Chamba, which is a 
liquid that is sprayed onto ritual vessels. 

Responders should be aware that the use of mercury ina 
ritualistic vessel is quite common in Palo Mayombe. 

This celebratory shrine contains many objects 
representing the deities of Haitian Voodoo. 

The priest (Houngan) and the priestess (Mambo) perform 
sacred baths using herbs and water. 

The priestess, known as the Mambo, takes the rattle called 
an Asson. 

The three-legged pot known as the Zin is filled with oil 
and burnt as a lamp. 

A mural of a traditional Voodoo ceremony. 

An altar dedicated to those lost in the tragedy of 
Hurricane Katrina. 

An altar dedicated to the folk saints of 
Curanderismo. 


55 
56 
57 
67 
68 


72 


76 


77 


78 


79 


80 


82 


83 


84 


85 


87 


91 


96 


97 


99 


100 


107 


110 


List of Figures 


Figure 7.2 
Figure 7.3 


Figure 7.4 


Figure 7.5 
Figure 7.6 
Figure 7.7 
Figure 7.8 


Figure 7.9 
Figure 7.10 


Figure 7.11 
Figure 7.12 


An altar dedicated to Our Lady of Guadalupe. 
Responders may encounter statues of folk saints and 
offerings to the spirits that they represent. 

Folk saints, such as San Martin Caballero, bring good 
fortune to those who honor him in their homes and 
businesses. 

Santa Muerte is a folk saint who is reported to be 
honored as the patron saint of criminals. 

Amulets and talismans are sold by the Curandero/ 
Curandera to provide health and healing. 

Herbs may be prescribed by a Yerbero who serves as an 
herbal specialist to the Hispanic community. 

Patients may use herbal soaps and oils designed to 
physically and spiritually heal aches and pains. 
Patients may wear necklaces dedicated to folk saints. 
The Ojo De Vando or Deer’s Eye is used to ward off the 
evil eye or Mal de Ojo. 

An amulet used to ward off the evil eye. 

The Curandero is the local healer, psychiatrist and 
priest. 


xiii 


111 


112 


112 


114 


116 


116 


119 


121 


122 


123 


Preface 


Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities: A Guide for First Respond- 
ers was written to give responders a cultural bridge of understanding when 
interacting with the various magico-religious cultures of the world. The 
cultural intricacies that exist in religion present a challenge to the believ- 
ers of these faiths and to the outsiders who encounter them. Artifacts, ritu- 
als and symbols are but small pieces of religious culture; these aspects can 
be seen with the naked eye by both believer and nonbeliever. The meanings 
attached to these aspects are hidden somewhere in the mythology of reli- 
gious culture. 

Understanding the hidden meanings behind these artifacts affects how 
responders choose to interact with patients who belong to these religious 
cultures. Knowledge of cultural taboos can give responders an advantage 
in communicating with a patient. Understanding that physical illness can 
have a “magical” significance can help responders in interpreting patient 
behavior. 

There are several aspects of religious culture that can be understood 
through the disciplines of cultural anthropology and religious studies. This 
book seeks to draw from these disciplines and place religious culture in a 
context that will be relevant to the first responder. The complexities of each of 
these religious cultures cannot be limited to one chapter, but this book pro- 
vides an elementary understanding of the basic concepts of these cultures. 

Chapter 1 provides an important introduction to the need for trans- 
cultural communication skills and cultural competency for responders. 
Chapter 2 introduces readers to the concept of magic in religious culture 
and the common elements found in this culture. Chapter 3 (Neopagan- 
ism) provides responders with information on the culture of contemporary 
witchcraft and the various indigenous religions that are being revitalized in 
Western society. Chapter 4 (Santeria [Regla de Ocha]) is an examination of 
the Afro-Caribbean religion of the Yoruba people. Issues relating to sacred 
objects, biohazards and cultural taboos are a special focus. Chapter 5 (Palo 
and Kongo Religions) looks into the culture of Palo Mayombe and the vari- 
ous Bantu faiths. Chapter 6 (Voodoo) introduces the reader to the practices 
and beliefs of this Haitian-based religion. The actual culture of the Voudon 
faith is presented to help responders separate “fact” from “fantasy.” Chapter 
7 (Curanderismo) looks at the phenomena of folk saints and folk healing 


XV 


xvi Preface 


among members of the Latin community. Herbal healing is examined as a 
practice that is widely used among the healers and patients in the commu- 
nity. Chapter 8 (Closing Issues) assesses cultural aspects using Kleinman’s 
Tool to Elicit Health Beliefs in Clinical Encounters. The Appendix (Index of 
Symbols) contains a catalog of symbols used in the artifacts and practices of 
magico-religious groups. And, finally, a Glossary of Cultural Terms provides 
readers with a lexicon of cultural terms that patients from various cultures 
may use when communicating with responders. 

Public service agencies should provide employees with the tools neces- 
sary to properly assess situations and to effectively communicate with the 
growing population of magico-religious groups. Cultural competency can 
ensure cultural diversity and protection of deeply held religious faiths. It can 
also protect the health of responders and protect society from dangerous 
practices. Cultural competency does not mean that we condone or disap- 
prove of a culture; it simply means that we understand each other’s world- 
view. It is my hope that this book serves as a map to those unfamiliar cultures 
that responders may encounter. 


Tony Kail 


Forensic Theology Consultants 


Acknowledgments 


There are a number of people who have helped me understand the world of 
magico-religious culture. It was through the numerous introductions and 
relationships with members of these spiritual communities that I have been 
allowed to photograph and document the altars and shrines of believers. It is 
through the courtesy and hospitality of these practitioners that I have been 
permitted to witness ceremonies and rites of passage among various groups. 
Thank you for sharing your culture for the greater benefit of understanding. 

I am deeply grateful to those who are involved in the pursuit of public 
safety. From law enforcement to emergency medical services (EMS), your 
service to our society is invaluable. I am grateful to those of you who have 
helped me understand the needs and demands of first responders. 

Finally, it is only with the support of my faith, family and friends that I 
am able to continue this work. You are my rock. 


xvii 


Author 


Tony Kail is the founder of and serves as director of the Forensic Theology 
Resource Center at Jackson, Tennessee. He has served as a consultant and 
lecturer to numerous regional, state and federal law enforcement agencies 
on the subject of magico-religious groups and has 17 years of experience 
in research and fieldwork with these groups. Kail also has served as a dep- 
uty sheriff and as an animal cruelty investigator for the Madison County 
Humane Society. 

He has worked on a number of ethnographic research projects with 
members of the Neopagan and African religious communities. His research 
has been used to train police and forensic and public safety agencies around 
the world. Kail has conducted research in East Africa among members of 
African traditional religious groups, and has observed and documented 
hundreds of hours of rituals and ceremonies among magico-religious groups 
in the United States and abroad. 

Kail has served as an adjunct instructor in the Police Sciences Division 
of Nashville State Community College and Jackson State Community Col- 
lege (Tennessee). His unique approach to magico-religious groups and ritu- 
alistic activities is presented in the R.U.L.E.S. (Ritualistic Understanding 
for Law Enforcement Strategies) program, which he developed. He combines 
his knowledge of cultural and forensic anthropology with law enforcement 
strategies to provide agencies with effective tools in approaching religious 
cultures. 

He has authored several publications on magico-religious culture, ritu- 
alistic crime and transcultural communication, and has begun work on col- 
lecting and documenting ritual tools and artifacts used in magico-religious 
practices throughout the world. The collection currently contains over 500 
pieces and will serve as a research resource for cultural and physical anthro- 
pologists, law enforcement and forensic investigators. 

Kail is a member of the International Association of Counterterrorism 
and Security Professionals, the Tennessee chapter of the International Associ- 
ation of Identification and the Public Safety Writers of America Association. 


xix 


Introduction 


First Responders 





First responders can come from a variety of disciplines, such as fire service 
responders or police officers, or one may work in emergency medical services 
(EMS) or volunteer his/her time in a rescue service. Regardless of your back- 
ground, the challenges that you encounter when meeting people on emer- 
gency calls are that they are typically in a very fragile state. The sound of 
a siren or the appearance of a uniform may be the only thing that brings a 
victim of violence or illness comfort when in a state of trauma. It is in these 
times that you serve as protector, healer and counselor to those in need of 
your assistance. 

In order for responders to effectively provide quality care, it is neces- 
sary for service personnel to keep themselves protected and safe. This means 
assessing scenes for any overt hazards as well as knowing how to detect the 
subtle, not so obvious dangers. 

As you encounter patients from a variety of backgrounds, you discover 
that race, religion and economic status take the back seat when providing 
care. However, there are situations in which elements of a religious culture 
can present unique obstacles to providing proper treatment. What happens 
when the elements of one’s faith become issues that may harm his/her health 
or confuse those providing emergency care? 

What if in the course of “assessing the scene” you encounter a patient in 
the middle of a religious ceremony that includes some things that make you 
personally uncomfortable. Candles, knives or even blood at a scene can cre- 
ate an element of fear and apprehension in us all. A patient who is wearing a 
hooded robe or jewelry with strange symbols could appear menacing to an 
outsider. How would this affect you? 


View from the Patient’s Perspective 





Imagine yourself as a member of an immigrant Haitian family that has 
recently moved into the U.S. Midwest. In addition to the language and cul- 


1 


2 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


tural barriers that present everyday challenges to your family, your religious 
faith is kept secret from local residents. Voodoo: Just the mention of that 
word makes most Westerners uneasy. Books and movies talk about your reli- 
gion as some sort of demon worship that practices human sacrifice. But, you 
as a Haitian grew up knowing the gods and goddesses of Haitian Voodoo 
as spirits of nature that your family openly served for several generations. 
Your experience with Voodoo has been something very different from that 
depicted in the media. Now, imagine that your mother has become very ill. 
She clutches her chest experiencing severe pain. You dial 911 for help. As 
responders arrive at your home, they can plainly see the altars and shrines 
that are set up around the house. One responder’s eye catches the skull on 
your altar that represents the Ghede family of spirits. 

You can relate to the feeling of fear on the responders’ faces. As they take 
your mother’s hand, you notice that she is wearing her beaded bracelet that 
gives her spiritual protection. You hope that they don’t remove it. 

As a responder, it is necessary to place yourself in the role of the patient. 
It is there that you begin to not only understand the patient’s healthcare 
needs, but also the need for physical and verbal communication that will 
bring them peace and allow them to openly communicate. 


Risks for First Responders 


Aside from the potential threats that exist in these types of scenes, there are 
several unique risks that may be present. While responding to a call involving 
a patient experiencing heart problems, a scene involving the Santeria religion 
may also contain additional risks to patient and responder. Mercury may be 
present at the scene, as it is used in rituals and in amulets. Flammable liquids, 
such as the cologne “Florida Water,” may be present near heat sources. It is in 
these situations that it is important for the responder to know what possible 
dangers might be present alongside cultural elements (Figure 1.1). 

Nonlaw enforcement personnel responding to scenes may encounter 
elements that make it necessary to call authorities to assist at the scene. A 
responder encountering practitioners of Palo Mayombe may observe the 
sacred vessel known as the “Nganga” at the scene. The human bones that are 
used in the making of the religious shrine may be present and in violation of 
state health regulations. 

Finally, as you interact with your patient, you may find that the patient is 
describing pains that he or she attributes to spiritual matters. The pains may 
also have unfamiliar folk names, such as Susto or Empacho. The Diagnostic 
and Statistcal Manual of Mental Disorders-IV (DSM-IV) manual, which is 
used to diagnose mental disorders, includes a section on the phenomenon of 
“cultural bound syndromes.”! These are illnesses caused by a cultural belief. 


Introduction 3 





Figure 1.1 The growing number of magico-religious practitioners in society 
creates new challenges for responders hoping to attain cultural competency. 


One example is the cultural concept of Rootwork, which is a collective term 
used to describe the use of roots and herbs in spells and magical rituals. 
Rootwork is practiced in many religious cultures, but is known primarily 
as a term used in the Southern United States by practitioners of Hoodoo or 
Southern folk magic. The symptoms that result from the cultural acceptance 
of rootwork as a form of aggravation include anxiety, nausea, vomiting, diar- 
rhea, weakness, dizziness, fear of poisoning and fear of death. Responders 
may encounter patients that show these symptoms and who disclose a belief 
in Rootwork. 

You may find that patients of various cultures utilize healing methods 
that appear unusual. Environmental control is the ability of members of a 
culture to plan activities that control nature or direct environmental factors. 
This includes systems of traditional health and illness beliefs, the practice of 
folk medicine, and the use of traditional healers. This influences the way in 
which the members of a culture define health and illness and how they might 
seek treatment.” 


Solutions 





These situations create unique challenges for first responders. However, there 
are a number of solutions that can assist the responder in providing quality 
healthcare, respect for diversity and remaining safe from hazards at the scene. 


4 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 1.2 Cultural competency can assist responders in avoiding violation of 
cultural taboos, such as the handling of religious artifacts considered “sacred.” 


The field of healthcare has incorporated a number of strategies in deal- 
ing with members of various cultures they may encounter. Some agencies, 
like the Boston Healing Landscape Project? in Boston, Massachusetts, have 
trained healthcare professionals with classes covering subjects, such as Afri- 
can Diaspora religions and the use of herbs in the Haitian community. 

Some agencies have incorporated networking with ritual specialists 
from the various religious communities. These specialists, known as “cul- 
tural brokers,” assist medical professionals by providing spiritual services 
alongside traditional Western healthcare. The office of cultural brokers was 
first discovered when anthropologists observed that certain people in some 
societies could act as middlemen and bring understanding between colonial 
governments and world cultures.4 

It is safe to assume that not every agency has the means or staffing to 
develop programs such as these. Asa first responder, you can develop a degree 
of “cultural competency” that will allow you to operate in the realms of vari- 
ous cultures. Cultural competency provides us with a strategy to accomplish 
the goals of proper response and assistance to patients without being side- 
tracked by cultural shock. An informed plan of action will give us the tools 
necessary to communicate successfully and lessen the possibility of alienat- 
ing the patient (Figure 1.2). 


References 


1. American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders DSM-IV (4th ed.). APPI: Arlington, VA. 


Introduction 5 


2. Spector, Rachel E. (2003). Cultural Diversity in Health and Illness. Prentice 
Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

3. Boston Healing Landscape Project (2007). http://www.bmc.org/pediatrics/ 
special/bhlp 

4. National Center for Cultural Competence (2004). Bridging the Cultural Divide 
in Health Care Settings: The Essential Role of Cultural Broker Programs. http:// 
www11.georgetown.edu/research/gucchd/nccc/documents/Cultural_Broker_ 
Guide_English.pdf 


An Introduction to 
Religious Culture for 
Responders 


Cultural Competency 





When a responder encounters a culture that he or she is unfamiliar with, 
there is a concept known as cultural competency that would benefit the 
responder in assessing the patient and the scene. Cultural competency has 
been defined as “a set of values and principles, and demonstrative behaviors, 
attitudes, policies and structures that enable organizations to operate cross- 
culturally.”! In looking at various religious cultures, we can begin to form a 
plan of cultural competency by looking at some of the concepts of cultural 
anthropology as a guideline to understanding culture. 

Cultural anthropology utilizes a number of techniques and theories in 
which man can look at other cultures and find commonalities in concepts. 
Perhaps you have a Judeo-Christian background. Encountering members of 
the Wiccan faith, you can see some common concepts that are familiar to 
your belief system. The use of prayer, sacred space and even communion can 
be seen in both belief systems. These commonalities make it easy for you to 
understand the other cultures around you (Figure 2.1). 

One writer has penned the term family resemblances as a way to describe 
the common elements found in religious cultures.’ These family resem- 
blances can be seen in the religions that we will be discussing in this book. 

Some of the common elements that we see in religious culture include: 


Belief in Supernatural or Superior Beings: Supernatural beings may be 
referred to as gods, angels, demons, spirits or as cultural-specific names 
such as the deities of Santeria, known as Orisha; the spirits of Voodoo, 
known as Loa or the elemental spirits in Wicca, known as Watchers. 

The Significance of Human Life: Religion gives meaning to life. Each 
person is created for a reason that is dictated by the religious culture. 
For instance, the religion of Santeria teaches that man is born to serve 
the Orishas (deities) and that each person has a guardian Orisha. 

A Moral Code: Religious beliefs surrounding a moral code seek to give 
guidelines for personal ethics. The religion of Wicca observes a moral 
code known as the Wiccan Rede. 


8 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 2.1 Identifying “family resemblances” or common concepts among reli- 
gious cultures can assist responders in strategies related to communication and 
approach. 


An Account of Evil: Most religions have a form of evil or opposition. In a 
patient’s view, evil may be the cause of sickness. The practice of Curan- 
derismo teaches that the Mal de Ojo or Evil Eye can cause sickness. 

Prayer and Ritual: These serve as tools for human interaction with the 
supernatural. Responders may encounter patients who are praying or 
performing rituals to attain good health. 

Sacred Objects and Places: Religious objects may be used in concert with 
ritual and prayer to interact with the supernatural. Objects may also 
be worn by patients to protect them from harm. Some geographical 
locations may be considered sacred by patients, such as altars and ritual 
circles. These areas are typically used for sacred ceremonies. 

Religious Experience, Such as Awe and Mysticism: Religion serves as a 
very personal concept to all of those who believe in it. The freedom to 
observe or not observe a religion is a personal choice that is extremely 
valuable. Religious experiences are personal or communal, and are the 
time when practitioners have a form of interaction with the supernatu- 
ral. You may discover patients who are involved in a ritual or ceremony 
that produces this spiritual interaction. 

Institutionalized Social Sharing of Some of These Traits: Responders 
may discover that a patient is calling for assistance from a priest or 
priestess. The organized social sharing of a religion may be called a 
church or a temple. This is where the patient learns about his/her reli- 
gion and shares in this fellowship with fellow believers. 


An Introduction to Religious Culture for Responders 9 


Anthropological Terms 





Listed below are a few anthropological terms used frequently in this book. 
These terms refer to anthropological concepts that explain religious culture. 


Artifacts: Objects produced by a specific culture. An example that 
responders may encounter is the iron cauldron known as Oggun in the 
Afro-Caribbean religion of Santeria. 

Deities: The gods of a people. An example that responders may encounter 
when working with patients from the Haitian Voodoo community is 
the veneration of gods known as the Loa. 

Myth: A story from or about the past that is told and retold in order to 
express certain values (or truths). An example that responders may 
encounter when meeting members of the Santeria community is the 
use of myths known as Patakis. These stories communicate instruc- 
tion about the types of offerings that specific deities may ask for. For 
instance, a myth about the Santeria deity Eleggua tells of his need to 
have coconuts placed on his shrine. 

Pantheon: A catalog of deities. The various magico-religious cultures may 
have specific terms that are used to denote the deities, such the Loa of 
Voodoo, the Orishas of Santeria and the Mpungu of Palo Mayombe. 

Ritual: Symbolic behavior associated with religion or magic that is repeti- 
tive, sequential, nonordinary and believed to be powerful. Responders 
may encounter rituals in progress, such as the ritual known as Drawing 
Down the Moon in the religion of Wicca or an initiation ritual known 
as Kariocha in Santeria. 

Symbol: Image used to express ideas too complex to explain directly. 
Responders may discover tattoos, ritual scarring or jewelry that contains 
symbols, such as the pentagram used by Wiccans, or the various symbols 
used to drive away Mal de Ojo or the Evil Eye in Hispanic folk religions. 

Taboo: A cultural rule of avoidance. Responders should understand that 
recognition of taboo rules can affect how they should handle patient 
artifacts and how some patients are administered healthcare. An exam- 
ple that responders may encounter is the removing of the sacred beads 
known as Elekes in the Santeria religion or the avoidance of touching 
the artifacts that adorn the altar of a Wiccan practitioner. 

Worldview: How someone interprets the world and how it works. World- 
view governs the way that someone interprets life and how they react 
to this view. An example that responders may encounter includes the 
practitioners of Hispanic folk religions that believe a particular sick- 
ness may be caused by spiritual interference or jealousy from another 
individual. 


10 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Magico-Religious Cultures 





This book focuses on religions commonly referred to as Occult or Magico- 
Religious cultures. Magic is a term used in a number of religious cultures to 
denote the use of supernatural techniques to achieve a specific desire. Magic 
may be referred to by a specific cultural name, such as Mana or Ache. Prac- 
titioners believe magic may be created by performing various techniques, 
such as prayer and ritual. Each religious culture has its own specific crite- 
ria in creating magic. The magico-religious worldview focuses on the world 
being dominated by various spiritual forces, and fate is usually determined 
by these spiritual forces. Disease and health also may be determined by spiri- 
tual forces. An understanding of this worldview will help you as a responder 
to be sensitive to the needs of those who share this belief. 

Contemporary pop culture uses the colors of black and white to describe 
the intent or purpose of magic. In movies and television, White magic is 
depicted as being a benevolent force that is used to heal and protect the inno- 
cent. Black magic is commonly ascribed to those who dabble in curses and 
malevolent powers. While there are some authentic practitioners of magico- 
religious faiths that may use these terms, the majority of magical practitio- 
ners do not use them. In the magico-religious worldview, the same magic 
that is used to heal a sick child can be used to curse an enemy. Some practi- 
tioners have even likened magic to electricity, stating that both can be used 
for positive or negative results. 

Some religious scholars have called magic “man’s earliest attempt at tech- 
nology.” The use of drums, chanting, dancing and singing by primitive societies 
to create change is a universal phenomenon. Contemporary magical practices 
appear to fall into one of two categories. The first is called Theurgy. Theurgy 
is magic practiced to invoke the actions of a deity and ultimately to unite with 
that deity. Simply stated, this is magic performed to grow closer to a god. An 
example of this is the observance of Trance Possession in many of the magico- 
religious faiths in which the gods are called on to interact with humanity. 

The second type of magical practice is known as Thaumaturgy. Thau- 
maturgy is “practical magic” that is performed to influence everyday events. 
A practitioner might perform a protection ritual to protect him from being 
robbed or he may pray for financial success. 

In order to interact with the supernatural and obtain magic, the patient 
may use objects to summon this power. There are two universal concepts that 
dictate how a patient would use these objects. The first concept is known as 
The Law of Contact. This philosophy works on the principle that any item 
that has been in contact with someone can still affect that person (Figure 2.2). 
An example that responders may discover is the use of hair, nails or clothing 
kept on an altar in a patient’s home. These objects may represent the focus of 


An Introduction to Religious Culture for Responders 11 





Figure 2.2 The magical Law of Contact at work. The shoes are being used to 
conduct magical operations toward the owner of the shoes. The creator of this 
“working” was performing spell work to stop a man from abusing his wife. 


the magical working. The second concept is known as The Law of Similarity. 
This works on the belief that any object that resembles someone can affect 
that person. Responders may discover objects, such as dolls or photographs 
that contain names or images, that resemble the target of magic 

In the chapters to follow, we will look at some of the active magico-reli- 
gious groups in the United States. The groups included are only a segment of 
the magico-religious community. They are listed because of the great num- 
ber of practitioners. In each section we will look at the history and origins of 
these cultures in order to give you an overview into their past. And, we will 
look at theology and social structure in order to help you understand how to 
better communicate with these groups. We also will discuss physical objects, 
such as altars, artifacts and sacred spaces, in order to assist one in avoiding 
violating sacred taboos. Finally, we will look at the role that worldview plays 
in the health and healing process in the lives of practitioners and how your 
understanding can bring about a successful interaction. 


References 


1. National Center for Cultural Competence, Georgetown University Center for 
Child and Human Development, Washington, D.C.: http://www11.george- 
town.edu/research/gucchd/nccc/foundations/frameworks.html 

2. Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical Investigations (3rd ed.). Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1999. 


Neopaganism 


Assessing the Scene 


You and your partner receive a call involving a male who is complaining of 
chest pains. The location of the call is in a rural farm area in your district. 
Upon arriving at the scene, you find a group of approximately ten to fifteen 
men and women dressed in colorful robes. The group is standing in a circle 
formation. At the top of the circle is a table covered with various items, includ- 
ing candles, shells, cups and flowers. The smell of burning incense hangs in 
the air. As you approach, a man standing inside the circle holds up a knife 
and begins to rotate it around the circle. He shouts, “I banish this circle and 
thank the gods and goddesses that attended our rite. So mote it be.” The group 
responds loudly by saying, “So mote it be.” The group begins to step out of the 
circle and you then observe the person who is suffering chest pains. 


The initial encounter that a first responder may have with a Wiccan reli- 
gious ceremony may be puzzling. Someone who is unfamiliar with the cul- 
tural artifacts, rituals and practices of Wicca may confuse this religion with 
Satanism. Due to inaccuracies in the news media and with the similarities 
in artifacts, Wicca is many times falsely aligned with satanic beliefs. It is 
understandable that the appearance of robed figures, burning candles and 
ritual knives may appear threatening to an outsider, and it is possible that 
this may affect the manner in which the first responder communicates with 
the “mysterious” group. 


Beliefs and Practices 





The religion of Wicca, also known as witchcraft, is a religion that followers 
say has ancient roots in Pre-Christian Europe. Wicca or the Craft of the Wise 
comes from the early practices of a religion known as Paganism. 

Paganism focuses on the worship of nature and the gods and goddesses 
who rule over the aspects of human nature and the environment. The term 
pagan comes from an Old English word pagani. The Pagani were country 
dwellers who held onto folk practices involving healing, agriculture and reli- 
gion. Also known as Heathens (which simply means “one who lived on the 


13 


14 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


heath”), this early culture believed that the forces of nature could be destruc- 
tive or beneficial. There was a belief that if humans and nature could be ”in 
tune” with each other, then man could live peacefully and successfully. Magic 
was simply the harnessing of the power of nature. 

Early Pagans observed the phases of the moon and it’s affect on crops and 
human behavior. Female Pagans also included midwives, who assisted in the 
delivery of children. Men would call on the God of the Hunt before they went 
out to kill the much-needed game for food. Pagan society would call on vari- 
ous gods and goddesses for successful crops in order to feed their families. 

Paganism suffered a blow from the onslaught of the Medieval Inquisi- 
tion. Followers of the Old Religion were driven underground; however, years 
later, Paganism experienced a revival of sorts in the Western world. 


Neopaganism 


While a number of Pagans seek to revive the old religions, some Pagans 
believe that they never actually died, but were secretly kept alive through the 
centuries. Surprisingly, these Pagan cultures claim to have a lineage that can 
be connected back to the original ancient cultures of Paganism. 

Today Neopaganism is used as an umbrella term to describe a variety 
of magico-religious cultures. While these cultures have distinctive charac- 
teristics, they have some common elements as well. They tend to focus on 
preserving and being in tune with nature. They tend to be polytheistic, which 
means they follow many deities. They also tend to be somewhat secretive. 
While secrecy may seem to allude to something diabolical, it is observed as a 
way to preserve the purity of sacred rituals and teachings. 

Contemporary Neopaganism encompasses a number of religions, 
including: 


Asatru: A revival of the religions of the Europeans prior to encounters 
with Christianity. The word Asatru comes from the words True to the 
Aesir. The Aesir are the gods and goddesses of the Norse (Scandina- 
vians from the Viking Age to today). 

Druidism: The followers of this spiritual path follow the teachings and 
rituals of the Celtic Druids. 

Shamanism: A technique that is practiced in a number of world cultures. 
Specific “gifted” individuals known as Shamans are believed to have access 
to hidden spiritual worlds through dreams and rituals. The practices of 
these cultures have been organized into a modern-day religious faith. 

Wicca: The revival or continuation of the practices of European witch- 
craft. Wicca focuses on the worship of a female deity called The God- 
dess (Figure 3.1) and a male consort called The Great Horned God. 


Neopaganism 15 





Figure 3.1 Responders may observe images of female deities from a number of 
world religions used to represent the Goddess of the Wiccan religion. 


These are just a few of the many religious faiths that make up contempo- 
rary Neopaganism. 

It is likely that responders will encounter Wicca more frequently than 
some of the other Neopagan faiths simply because of its larger population 
size. For this reason, we will focus primarily on Wicca. 


History of Wicca 





In the 1920s, an archaeologist named Margaret Murray published two books 
entitled The Witch Cult in Western Europe and The God of the Witches. Mur- 
ray’s hypothesis was that European witches were part of a surviving lineage 
of folk magicians. Murray’s research was heavily disputed by historians and 
anthropologists; however, this did not stop her theories from affecting West- 
ern society. Many people became fascinated with the thought of connecting 
to something ancient and powerful. 


16 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


In 1949, Englishman Gerald Gardner published a book called High Mag- 
ic’s Aid. Written under the guise of fiction, this book relayed actual cultural 
information about the practices of Wicca. The book served as a springboard 
for many Westerners to seek out information about the real world of Wicca 
and it’s exotic practices. Gardner later wrote Witchcraft Today,! which was 
the first mass-published nonfictional work on Wicca. He is recognized as the 
founder of Gardenarian Wicca, a specific tradition/interpretation of Wicca. 

Today there are hundreds of Wiccan traditions followed throughout the 
world, each serving as an interpretation of ancient Pagan practices. Similar 
to the denominations found in Judeo-Christian religions, Wiccan traditions 
have distinct histories, rituals, symbols and artifacts. 


Traditions 


There are several other traditions or interpretations of Wicca. Following are 
some of the more popular forms of Wicca found in North America. 


Alexandrian Wicca 

This tradition was founded by Alex Sanders, who claims to have been initi- 
ated by his grandmother in the early 1930s. Alexandrian Wicca uses very 
complex rituals and may use ritual nudity in ceremonies. 


British Traditional Wicca 
BTW, as it is called in the culture, is a term that denotes that a group can trace 
its lineage back to Wiccan Gerald Gardner or Alex and Maxine Sanders. 


Celtic Wicca 
Celtic Wicca focuses on the pantheon of deities and the practices of Druidic 
society of the British Isles. 


Dianic Wicca 

Dianic traditions focus on the superiority of females and the power of the 
goddess found in women. Dianic Wicca has been called Feminist Wicca by 
some critics. 


Eclectic Wicca 

This is a path that is open to many faiths. Followers take deities, rituals and 
philosophies from different religious traditions. The initiate is not bound to 
a particular dogma or rule. 


Gardenarian Wicca 
Founded by Gerald Gardner (see above), Gardenarian Wicca is perhaps one 
of the most practiced Wiccan traditions in North America. Gardenarian 


Neopaganism 17 


Wicca focuses on worship of the god and goddess while holding the god- 
dess as the more powerful deity. Members learn tradition through the texts 
known as the Book of Shadows, which was a diary and manual of worship 
given to the founder, which he passed on to his followers. 


Georgian Wicca 

This tradition was started in Bakersfield, California, in 1971 by George Patter- 
son. The tradition takes elements from Gardenarian, Alexandrian traditions 
and from other recognized traditions. Members of this faith are encouraged 
to learn from all forms of magico-religious traditions. 


Hereditary Wicca 

Many American witches have traced their lineage back to generational 
witches. Spells and rituals have been passed down to them orally and through 
texts. While a Wiccan may belong to a “fam trad” (family tradition), he/she 
also may belong to a current tradition to identify with other believers. 


Mohsian Tradition 
Started in the 1960s as Eclectic American Tradition, Mohsian draws inspira- 
tion from Gardenarian Wicca, European shamanism and Celtic influences. 


Strega Tradition 

Italian witchcraft, known as Stregheria, has traditionally been followed by 
generational practitioners. However, there has been a new interest in the 
subject by those Americans unaffiliated with any kind of Italian traditions. 
Raven Grimassi is an Italian American that has popularized Strega tradition 
through such books as Ways of the Strega (2000, Llewellyn Publ.) and The 
Book of the Holy Strega (1981, Nemi Enterprises). 


Beliefs 


Wiccans seek to live in harmony with the Earth, which is viewed as a liv- 
ing entity. The primal elemental forces of Earth, wind, water and fire are 
viewed as powers to be honored, respected and sometimes controlled. 

According to Wiccan theology, the universe is comprised of four ele- 
ments: Earth, Wind, Water and Fire, which are said to be evident in all cre- 
ation. Responders may see these elements represented on altars and in rituals 
they encounter when answering an emergency call. The most popular sym- 
bol used in Wicca is the pentagram; a visual representation of the elements in 
the form of a five-pointed star. The fifth point represents spirit. 

While there is no sacred text central to Wicca, such as a Bible, there are 
several sacred texts, such as the Book of Shadows, used by members of the 


18 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Gardenarian tradition. Most Wiccan practices are communicated by oral 
tradition and the supplementing of various cultural texts. 


Deities of Wicca 


Wicca teaches that there are many gods that deserve reverence and worship. The 
primary deity is the goddess. The goddess is said to have been present in many 
different forms throughout history. Isis of Egyptians, Diana of the Romans 
and the Venus of the Greeks are just a few of the goddesses in history. 

The goddess is referred to as the Lady in Wiccan circles. She is associ- 
ated with the moon and is also identified as having three stages of existence: 
maiden, mother and crone. 

The male deity that is worshipped in Wicca is known as the Horned God. 
Also known as The Lord, the Horned God represents the male element of 
deity and nature. His image is denoted by the wearing of horns (the horns 
do not represent the character of Satan). Many historians feel that we get the 
modern image of a horned “devil” from this early Pagan deity. The Horned 
God has been represented in many different world religions. Wiccans may 
call upon the deities of any spiritual tradition that they wish, such as Pan, the 
Greek god of the woodlands; Cerrounous, the Celtic god of fertility and the 
underworld; or even Herne, the hunter spirit of Britain. Therefore, respond- 
ers may encounter an altar with statues of Buddha, Isis, Jesus and Hindu 
gods. Wiccans may use a pantheon of deities to worship and spiritually call 
upon. One occult historian summed it up like this: “All gods are one god, all 
goddesses are one goddess.” 


Ethics 


The ethics of Wicca are iterated in a cultural phrase known as The Wiccan 
Rede. The word rede is Anglo-Saxon for wise counsel. The rede states the 
focus and boundaries of this magico-religious belief system. The rede (or 
counsel) says, “An ye harm none, do what thou wilt.” The rede is similar to 
the Golden Rule in that it teaches Wiccans to show respect toward others in 
the practices of the religion. 

Many Wiccans subscribe to the concept of karma. Karma is a concept 
originally taught in Eastern religions that describes the action of cause and 
effect. Karma teaches that anything that you do will return to affect you. If 
you are kind to others, you will be blessed with kindness. If you are destruc- 
tive toward others, destruction will come to you. Karma is said to return 
three times as potent. In Wicca, this term is known as the Law of Three-Fold. 
This also affects the life and death process because many Wiccans believe in 
reincarnation. Reincarnation teaches that after death the soul is reborn or 


Neopaganism 19 





Figure 3.2 A High Priestess places a cord around the initiate. This represents a 
“degree” of initiation in the Alexandrian Wiccan tradition. 


migrates into a different body or being. Those who create “bad karma” will 
be reborn as lower beings as punishment. 


Group Structure 


The traditional term used to describe a Wiccan religious body is coven. Some 
groups use circle, grove or order. 

Wiccans believe that anyone can interact with the gods; therefore, 
clergy is not necessary to access the gods. However, clergy is recognized as a 
respected and honored office. Traditional leadership in the coven is led by the 
High Priestess (HPS). The title of High Priestess is bestowed on the female 
who reaches a predetermined level of experience and initiation in the Craft. 
Each tradition has its own requirements for the position of High Priestess 
(Figure 3.2). 

The High Priestess serves as the leader of the coven activities and ritu- 
als. She serves as counsel and guide to her initiates. Many members of this 
clergy wear necklaces made from amber or jet stones. Some traditions will 


20 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


recognize the High Priestess by a custom garter that she may wear or keep 
in her home. 

Covens may have several other offices, such as officers who are craftmak- 
ers for the group and members who act as summoners carrying out spiritual 
tasks for the group. Selected members also may act as treasurers and oversee 
the funds of the coven. 

Responders may encounter Wiccan security members known as watch- 
ers. Watchers are posted outside of ritual areas to intercept hostile or friendly 
outsiders who happen to come near the site. It is not uncommon to see watch- 
ers wearing two-way radios or self-defense weapons. Responders should ask 
for cooperation in locating the patient or scene that needs attention. Watch- 
ers may be able to assist in crowd control from unwanted visitors. Some large 
Pagan gatherings even have medical staff who are either members of the local 
Pagan community or who are familiar with the community. 


Ritual Tools 


Wiccans use a number of ritual tools in observance of rituals and worship, 
such as: 


Athame: The blade used in a Wiccan ritual is a symbol of the Horned 
God. The blade is known as the athame. Some Wiccans prefer to use a 
sword for this tool. The traditional athame is a black-handled knife that 
is used to create sacred space and to banish energy. It is not for cutting 
animal or human flesh. 

Bell: A bell may be used to cleanse the ritual environment. It may also be 
rung to end the ritual. 

Boliene: Some Wiccans use a white-handled knife known as the boliene. 
The boliene is used to cut herbs and to carve candles and wood. 

Book of Shadows: A book known as the Book of Shadows may be found on 
an altar. The name comes from the time in history when witches faced 
death and hid their secrets and spells “in the shadows.” The book may 
belong to an individual or may be owned by the group. 

Censer: The censer is a lamp used to burn incense. It may be attached to a 
chain that can be used to swing the lamp and spread the incense. 

Chalice: The chalice is a cup that may be made from glass, clay or silver. 
The cup is used to represent the womb of the female deity. The chalice 
may be filled with water, wine or juice. It is used in rituals where it may 
be combined with the blade to represent male and female or it may 
be used to hold libations for the gods. A substance, such as wine, may 
be kept in the chalice to symbolize the fertility of the Earth. Herbal 
potions may also be created in the chalice. 


Neopaganism 21 


Cords: Cords may be used by Wiccans in a form of magic known as “cord 
magic.” The most popular use is for the cord to show the status of initiates in 
the coven. The cord may be different colors to show the level of initiation. 

Pentacle: The pentacle is a round plate that is made of wood or stone. The 
plate usually contains symbols that represent the god and goddess, the 
ritual scourge, the ritual kiss, the second and third degrees, and the ele- 
ments. The pentacle is used to “charge” some tools and may be used to 
hold the cakes used in rituals. 

Scourge: The scourge (or cat œ’ nine tails) is a small whip used to symbol- 
ize several concepts in Wicca. It may be used to represent female domi- 
nance or it may be used to teach that wisdom is only available through 
pain and discipline. Some traditions use the scourge in a ritual scourg- 
ing that occurs during initiation rites. 

Wand: The wand is used to direct energy much like the athame. It is tra- 
ditionally made from wood and may be decorated with crystals and 
sacred words carved into its side. 

Tools may be consecrated and given magical properties. “Charging” 
tools may be done by placing ritual tools on altars and in sacred spaces. It is 
important that responders recognize that tools and jewelry may be “charged” 
and set apart for a sacred ritual. 


Rituals and Ceremonies 


While rituals may change according to the tradition and the practitioner, 
some of them are considered universal in Wiccan circles: 


e Correspondences 

e Preparation of ritual area 

e Consecration of ritual tools and implements 
e Casting the circle 

e Calling the quarters 

e Invocation of the deity 

e Energy raised 

e Spellwork 

e Cakes/wine 

e Opening and banishment of circle 


Correspondences 


The timing in which a ritual is performed is very important to Wiccan prac- 
tice. It is a common magical belief that certain calendar dates, hours of the 
days, colors, scents and planets are all connected. Many Wiccans work all of 
these elements into the ritual. Before any rituals are performed, a Wiccan 


22 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


may need to wait until all of these aspects have occurred. It is also believed 
that some days of the year have more power then others. Rituals may be spe- 
cifically held on these days to give the rituals more power. A ritual area may 
contain items that are specifically colored to represent these elemental corre- 
spondences. These colors are universal symbols of the elements. Some com- 
mon color correspondences are 


Air = Blue 
Fire = Red 
Water = Green 


Earth = Yellow, Black or Brown 


Preparation of Ritual Area 


The tools and altar may be set up in a specific location of a house or outdoor 
area. Many traditions place the altar to the East or the North. 


Consecration of Ritual Tools and Implements 


The tools and ritual area may be cleaned with salt to purify them of negative 
energies. The ritual area is swept with a broom to cleanse the space for the 
ceremony. The area may also be purified with saltwater. Some may remove 
all the elements around the area to cleanse it while a chant or prayer is per- 
formed over the tools to consecrate them. Ritual tools are passed through the 
smoke of the censer to cleanse them. Then they are passed through a candle 
flame, sprinkled with water and rubbed with salt or dirt. This puts the tool 
through all of the elements. 


Grounding 


Grounding is establishing a connection to the energies of the Earth. It is said 
to keep the body from overstressing during the end of the ritual. It returns 
excess energy to the Earth. The practitioner may place the athame on the 
ground to place the energy back into the Earth. 


Casting the Circle 


The Wiccan must open an area for spiritual work. This is accomplished by 
“casting” a circle. The Wiccan uses his/her finger, a dagger, a sword, or a 
wand to create a wall of spiritual energy. This wall is created by the Wic- 
can walking clockwise (called deosil) and pointing the object used to direct 


Neopaganism 23 


energy. Although the movement is in a circle motion, the circle of energy is 
actually described as a “sphere” that encompasses the space. The circle is not 
to be broken during ritual because it is the sacred space in which the deities 
of Wicca manifest. 

If the circle is to be broken, a doorway will be cut to let the practitioner 
walk outside the sacred space. This is cut open by the practitioner raising the 
athame and moving it counterclockwise (widdershins) and tracing a door. 


Calling the Quarters 


The directions of North, South, East and West are protected by guardian 
spirits, which are sometimes called watchtowers. The directions or quarters 
are called to witness the ritual. The Wiccan may draw or “invoke” a penta- 
gram in the air that represents the quarter and the element it represents. The 
watchers are called by specific prayers. A traditional call is 


“All ye mighty Lords and Ladies of the Watchtowers of North, bring forth 
the Earth Mother. The Gardener of the Earth, so that she may witness the 
purification of our bodies with this salt and plant the seed of spiritual growth 
within our souls.” 


Greek names for the four winds may be used during the calls. These spir- 
its are sent away and thanked at the end of the ritual. 


Invocation of Deity 


The deity is called and invited to appear in the circle. The god may be called 
by many names, such as Cerrounos, Pan, Horned God, or Herne, the Hunter. 
The goddess may be called Diana, Hecate, Isis or Cerridwen of the Cauldron. 
An example of an invocation follows: 

Gracious Goddess, 

You who are the Queen of the Gods, 

The lamp of night, 

The Creator of all that is wild and free; 

Mother of woman and man; 

Lover of the Horned One, and Protector of all the Wicca: 

Descend, I pray, 

With Your Lunar ray of Power 

Upon my circle here! 


24 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Energy Is Raised 


Energy is raised through singing, chanting, dancing or drumming, and is 
contained within the magickal’ circle. This energy is then raised into a cone 
of power, which then can be channeled to a specific area of concentration to 
perform magic. The cone of power is easily visualized by picturing a tradi- 
tional witch. 


Spellwork 


Spellwork is done with the energy raised. Spells are performed for healing, 
protection, spiritual peace, and other wishes. 


Cakes/Wine 


The ingestion of wine and cakes will bring the Wiccan out of the ritual state 
of mind. This also binds the practitioners through the sharing of food. The 
food is typically consecrated by the High Priestess and High Priest. 


Opening and Banishment of the Circle 


The circle must be banished after the ritual. The Wiccan walks counterclock- 
wise (called widdershins) to take the energy away. This will open the ritual 
area and allow the Wiccan to leave the sacred space. The deities and guard- 
ians are released. 

The closing of a circle is usually met with the cry: “Merry meet, merry 
part, and merry meet again.” 


Rites of Passage 


Wiccaning: This ritual presents a child to the deities of Wicca. The child 
may be presented to the Elemental Watchers. The child is traditionally 
anointed on the head with a touch of oil. The child may receive a Wic- 
can name during this ceremony. 

Coming of Age: Some covens will observe a Coming of Age ritual when a 
girl begins her menstrual cycle. 

Handfasting: The hand fasting is a wedding ceremony. The man and woman 
are joined by hands to dedicate themselves and to the gods. The ceremony 


* The spelling with the terminal “k” was repopularized in the first half of the twentieth 
century by Aleister Crowley when he made it a core component of his mystical system 
of Thelema. 


Neopaganism 25 


may be marked by a completion of the ritual The Great Rite. The hand- 
fasting is legally binding if the priest or priestess is legally ordained. 
Funeral Rites: The loss of a coven member may be recognized by a cer- 
emony held strictly in private by fellow coven members. The concept of 
a Pagan paradise, known as the Summerlands, is held by many with the 
Wiccan worldview. One ritual act may be the “breaking of the bowl.” 


Holy Days 


Wiccans may gather on specific times to perform rituals and socialize. Wic- 
can traditions encourage gatherings during certain phases of the moon. 
These gatherings are called Esbats. The word esbat is French for “to frolic.” 
The moon is revered because of its representation of the goddess as well as its 
importance to nature. Public Esbats may be advertised in metaphysical sup- 
ply stores and on Internet Web sites. 

Sabbats are considered the Wiccans high holy days. Many of them cor- 
respond with changes of the seasons. Traditionally, there are eight Sabbats 
celebrated by Wiccans. The greater Sabbats are Imbolc, Beltane, Lughnassad, 
and Samhain. The lesser Sabbats are the summer and winter solstices, and 
the autumnal and spring equinoxes. These holidays are usually pictured as a 
wheel. The wheel contains the seasons and turns as time passes. 

Each Sabbat has a specific ritual and symbolic meaning regarding the life 
and death of the gods. 


Samhain 

Samhain is celebrated October 31st. This is the celebration of the time of year 
when the veil between the worlds of the living and the dead are thinnest. 
Darkness is dominant. This is the New Year's Eve of the Celtic religions. The 
Horned God becomes the Lord over Summerland. This is the change from 
summer to winter. 


Yule 

Yule occurs around December 22. This is the winter solstice. Wiccans cele- 
brate the longest night of the year as well as the rebirth of the Sun God. There 
is a fight between the Oak King and the Holly King. 


Imbolc 

The holiday of Imbolc occurs February 2. This celebrates the first appearance 
of light. Imbolc means in the belly. The goddess is recovering from giving 
birth to the god. The Sun God stays up longer during this time. This celebra- 
tion is important to Brigid, the goddess of healing. The priestess may wear a 
crown of lights. 


26 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Ostara 

Ostara, or the spring equinox, is celebrated March 21. This is the day of equal 
balance of day and night. Spring fertility is celebrated, as is Ostara, goddess 
of fertility. The Christian celebration of Easter is taken from this holiday. The 
goddess becomes pregnant by the Horned God. 


Beltane 

The Sabbat of Beltane is celebrated April 30. The holiday celebrates the 
changing of winter to summer. Maypoles are planted this day. The maypole 
celebrates the Earth’s fertility. The wreath and pole symbolize fertility while 
the dancing around the pole builds energy to pass into the Earth. 


Litha 

Litha is the celebration of Midsummer’s eve or summer solstice. It is usually 
held June 21. It is the longest day and shortest night of the year with the Sun 
God at his peak. This is a celebration of transformation. The Oak King dies 
and the Holly King is born. 


Lammas 

Lammas is celebrated July 31 through August 1. This is the time of harvest. 
The word lammas comes from Old English words that mean loaf and mass. 
It is an ancient celebration of the first fruits of harvest coming in. The Celtic 
Sun God, Lugh, is also revered on this date. The god begins to descend into 
the underworld. 


Mabon 

Mabon is celebrated September 21. This is the autumnal equinox. This is the 
sacrifice of the Sun God and a celebration of the balance between light and 
day. The autumn equinox marks the end of the harvest. 


Sacred Spaces 


Wiccan altars and sacred spaces are similar to pieces of art. They may be 
very simple with a few well-placed items or they may be very elaborate with 
custom-crafted tools and artifacts. A Wiccan altar may be as basic as a 
few pieces of stone, feathers and a cup of water, or it may be a handcrafted 
statue of a Roman goddess, with flowers, jewelry and candles. The important 
aspect is to remember that these sacred spaces mean something to the owner 
(Figure 3.3). 

Some Wiccans will designate outdoor areas as sacred spaces. Rocks and 
trees may be recognized as natural objects that invoke the spiritual. Some 
Wiccans use their backyard as a sacred space to perform rituals. 


Neopaganism 27 





Figure 3.3 A Wiccan altar. This altar contains objects that may appear as “non- 
religious” objects, such as the rocks, pinecones, plants and shells. Responders may 
observe what appear to be common objects such as these on altars and in shrines. 


The altar is traditionally placed in the northern area of the sacred space. 
The direction of North is of significance to Wiccans because it represents the 
element of Earth. The Wiccan altar contains artifacts and substances that are 
used in ritual and worship. Some of the most commonly used objects include: 


The Gods: Statues, masks, dolls and pictures are placed on altars to rep- 
resent the god and goddess. Deer antlers and seashells may be used to 
represent the male and female element (Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.5). 

The Elements: The altar may also contain objects that represent the four 
elements. Earth may be represented by pieces of soil, plants, dollar bills, 
stones or wood. Air may be represented by a feather, fan or bird’s nest. 
Water may be represented by a bowl of water, seashells and even pic- 
tures of fish. Fire can be represented by an extra candle, red objects or 
an image of the sun. The elements may also be represented by colored 
candles. Fire may be represented by a red candle, water by a blue candle, 
Earth by a green candle, and air by a yellow candle. 

Cauldron: The cauldron may be placed on the altar to represent the goddess. 
The cauldron may contain herbs or incense to burn during the ritual. 

Salt: Salt may be placed on an altar to cleanse ritual spaces. 

Offerings: Altars may contain candy, flowers, fruits and vegetables. These 
may be given as offerings to the gods. 

Photographs: Altars may contain photos of relatives and friends that are 
seeking healing or have passed away. The photo may be present to show 
respect and honor to the ancestor or to communicate with the dead. 


28 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 3.4 Upon entering a residence, responders may discover cultural objects 
related to a person’s faith as decorations. The wreath in the window is the sacred 
Pentagram of the Wiccan faith, and the stone ram represents the Horned God of 
Neopagan Wicca. 


r J 





Figure 3.5 Figures representing the God and Goddess of Wicca. 


Neopaganism 29 


Note: Responders should avoid touching altars or handling objects found 
on altars. 


Health and Sickness 


There are anumber of approaches to health and sickness in Wicca. The following 
are some of the more popular healing techniques employed by practitioners. 


Cord Healing 

A cloth cord may be worn by the patient. Feelings of sickness and thoughts 
of the illness may be focused into the cords. The cord is pulled away from the 
patient with the intent of removing the sickness. 


Aromatherapy 
Aromatherapy is the art of healing using oils and oil blends. The aroma of the 
oils reduces stress and anxiety. 


Chanting 

Chants are viewed as energized words used to raise “power” which can be 
used in healing. One Wiccan’s Book of Shadows uses the following chant 
called “The Healing Rune”: 


This is the spell that we intone 
Flesh to flesh and bone to bone 
Sinew to sinew and vein to vein 
And each one shall be whole again 


Auric Healing 

The aura is seen as the electromagnetic field that surrounds the body of all 
living beings. Humans, animals and plants all have this energy, which has 
spiritual, physical, mental and emotional qualities. The aura may be known 
as the “etheral body” and has different layers of colors, vibrations and even 
locations on the human body. Some Wiccans believe that the aura can be 
seen by gifted individuals. The color (or clarity) of the aura is an indicator of 
the health of the body. The following are a few examples of how these colors 
may be interpreted: 


e Red auras show that someone has strong passion. Dark red may also 
indicate that the person is quick tempered. 

e Orange auras express creativity or may also indicate kidney problems. 

e Yellow auras characterize optimism or good health. 

e Green auras indicate sympathy or denote someone with healing abilities. 


30 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


e Blue auras signify calmness, but also indicate moodiness or depression. 
e Black auras signify no conscience or may denote a sociopath. 
e White auras characterize purity and truth. 


Some believe the aura is the first area that is attacked when sickness 
attacks the body. Sickness may be the result of loss or imbalance in the 
aura. The energy, sometimes called Prana, is manipulated and the patient is 
“recharged” with energy from outside sources. This technique of healing may 
include the laying on of hands (Figure 3.6). 





Figure 3.6 A ritual healing is being performed to remove negative energies that 
are causing problems in the life of the patient. The crystal acts as a conductor of 
energy. 


Neopaganism 31 


Chakras 

Chakras are said to be energy points located throughout the human body. 
These points are the locations through which energy is distributed through- 
out the cells, tissues and organs. 


The “root chakra” is the line of energy that runs from the feet to the lowest 
part of the abdomen. This is the energy area that provides survival and 
grounding powers. This chakra coincides with the gonad glands. 

The “navel chakra” is found in the area of sexual reproduction and embodies 
creativity. This chakra coincides with the adrenal gland. 

The “solar plexus chakra” is located exactly where it indicates and deals with 
the will, energy and power. This chakra coincides with the lyden gland. 

The “heart chakra” covers the heart and lung area and encompasses the 
realms of love and lust. This chakra coincides with the thymus gland. 

The “throat chakra” covers the throat and larynx area as well as the glands 
around them, and covers communication. This chakra coincides with 
the thyroid gland. 

The “third eye chakra” is located between the eyes and involves mental energy 
and focus. This chakra coincides with the pineal gland. 

The “crown chakra” is found at the tip of the head and protects against nega- 
tive forces. This chakra coincides with the pituitary gland. 


The misalignment of these energy points can produce sickness. Tech- 
niques involving sound therapy, massage and meditation are used to align 
these points. 


Absent Healing 
If a person is sick and the fellowship group is unavailable to physically visit 
them, a coven may send healing energy from a distance through various 
healing rituals. The group may focus on a photo or an image in the form of 
a doll to create healing for the patient. Altars may contain hair, clothing and 
other materials to be used in sympathetic magic rituals. 

One spell calls for the use of a “stand-in”; a person who resembles the 
patient. He or she is viewed as a model of the patient and healing rituals are 
performed on this person with hopes that they will benefit the patient. 


Herbalism 

Wiccan writers Janet and Stewart Farrar tell us that Wiccans are drawn to 
herbalism because “the Craft is a Nature-based religion, and the study of 
herbs is a very fruitful way of sharpening their attunement to Gaia, the Earth 
organism, on all the levels.”” 


32 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Responders may discover that a patient has ingested herbs or applied 
them to wounds. The use of herbs by Wiccans has two facets. The first is the 
traditionally recognized properties of medicine as observed by most West- 
erners. The second is concerned with magical energies that herbs may pro- 
duce. Some traditional practitioners use the term Wortcunning to describe 
the secret knowledge of herbs and their magical properties. 

Herbs may be used in a number of ways, such as ingested or placed in 
water as a tea, or they may be placed in bathwater. The practitioner sits in 
the bath and takes in the medicinal and magical properties through his/her 
skin. Herbs also can be carried as charms. Commonly found in small bags, 
the herb provides a transportable power, such as protection or healing. Herbs 
may also be placed in oils. The oil provides a liquid form of the herb to be used 
to anoint persons and objects with its powers. Herbs may also be smoked in 
pipes and rolling papers. Typically, smoking an herb is used to create altered 
states of consciousness. Herbs can also be simply placed in ritual areas in 
order to draw magical energies to these locations. 

Herbs used for magical practices may have the potential to be dangerous 
if ingested. Some common herbs used in Wiccan magic include: 


Mandrake (Atropa mandragora): Folk names include Deadly Nightshade, 
Devil’s Apple and Herb of Circe. The root of the mandrake resembles 
the shape of a human being and can be carried as an amulet of protec- 
tion. The root also can be kept in a house to protect the dwelling. Some 
literature suggests soaking the root in spring water to “wake” it. A tea 
may be made with the root to produce visions. 

Angelica (Angelica archangelica): Folk names include Masterwort and 
Garden Angelica. This legendary herb is alleged to have been given to 
man by an archangel to cure the plague. The herb is used to heal sick- 
ness and is believed to magically protect the owner of the root. Pieces 
may also be dried and burned as incense. Angelica added to bathwater 
can remove a hex. Large doses can produce high blood pressure and 
raise the heart rate. 

Thyme (Thymus vulgaris): Folk names include Garden Thyme. The herb 
is used to guard against nightmares. It may be placed inside a pillow to 
prevent these events. Thyme may also be burned as incense or worn as 
an amulet to guard against sadness or to draw love. Thyme is also used 
in cleansing rituals to remove negative energies. 

Sandalwood (Santalum album or Santalum rubrum): Folk names include 
Red Sanders. Sandalwood is used to create a spiritual environment. The 
herb is used to increase power in performing the magical practices of 
divination, astral travel and working with spirits. 

Hemlock (Conium maculatum): Folk names include Poison Hemlock, 
Poison Parsley, Herb Bennet and Corobane. Hemlock is historically 


Neopaganism 33 


recognized as a poison and as an ingredient used in flying ointment. 
Hemlock assisted early witches in the practice of astral travel; however, 
legends rumored that witches could actually fly. Many Wiccans use the 
herb in purification rituals. 

Nettle (Urtica diocia): Folk names include Stinging Nettle, Greater Nettle 
and Common Nettle. The most common nettle found in the United 
States is the stinging nettle, which has fine hairs that contain an acid 
solution. Contact with skin can produce burning and irritation. The 
herb can be dried and used as a protective amulet and also placed in a 
home as a form of protection. 

Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris): Folk names include Artemis herb, Arte- 
misia, St. John’s Plant, and Naughty Man. Made into a tea, Mugwort 
increases clairvoyance. 

Arabic gum (Acacia senegal/Acacia seyal): May be in a resin or powder 
form. The substance is used to purify. The ritual use of Arabic gum may 
be to draw protective circles and to open psychic channels. 

Basil (Ocimum basilicum): May be called St. Joseph’s Wort and Witches 
Herb. Basil is used in spellwork concerning prosperity and wealth. Basil 
made into a tea can ease nausea. 

Benzoin (Styrax benzoin) Benzoin is burned to purify a space. The resin 
may be burned to assist in astral travel. 

Chamomile (Anthemis noblis): Folk names include Ground Apple, White 
Star and Scented Mayweed. Chamomile is used in rituals for peace and 
relaxation. Teas and baths may be made using this herb. 

Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare): Fennel can be used for protection and ban- 
ishing negative energies. 

Frankincense (Boswellia genus): Frankincense may be known as Obliba- 
num and Frankincense Tears. This resin is burned to purify an area and 
for protection. 

Vervain (Verbena officinalis): Folk names include Juno’s Tears, Herb of Grace 
and Pigeon Grass. Vervain is used to assist in divination and prophecy.? 


Ritual Body Art 


Some Wiccan circles make use of ritual body paint to aid in the healing pro- 
cess. Ritual body art uses various colors and sacred symbols as a means of 
communication to society and to the deities. A pregnant woman may have 
her stomach painted with a green triangle surrounding a circle. The color 
green standing for fertility and the symbols standing for pregnancy. 


34 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Smudging 


The practice of smudging has historically been connected to the Native 
Americans. Smudging was a technique used to remove negative energies 
from a person and from a place in order to create a sacred environment. 
Wiccans may burn dried herbs in a bowl or shell. The herbs can also be tied 
together in a bundle. The herbs produce a smoke that is fanned around the 
area being cleansed. A feather is commonly used to fan the smoke. Wiccans 
also may smudge themselves or others with herbs in a cleansing ritual. 

Sageisacommonly burnedherb used in smudging. Responders may discover 
that the scent of burning sage is similar to the scent of burning marijuana. 


Candles 


Candles may be used in healing rituals and they come in a number of shapes, 
sizes and colors. Some of the common attributes of candle colors include: 


e Black: evil, protection, adversity 

e Blue: moodiness, peace, tranquility, health 

e Brown: neutrality, uncertainty, doubt, balance 

e Green: money, success, fertility, luck 

e Orange: encouragement, attraction, joy 

e Pink: love, honor, feminine 

e Purple: power, tension, ambition 

e Red: strength, love, passion, sex, vitality 

e White: purity, truth, god, spirituality, clairvoyance 
e Yellow: charm, confidence, creativity 


Candles are traditionally anointed with oil. The practitioner chooses an 
oil that will enhance the power of the candle. The oil is then rubbed onto the 
candle in a particular pattern. It may be rubbed down the candle to draw 
in energy and rubbed away from the candle to get rid of energies. The prac- 
titioner may also carve symbols and the name of the person needing to be 
healed into the candle. Photos and names of patients may be placed under 
the candle for healing purposes (Figure 3.7). 

One healing ritual consists of the lighting of candles while visualizing 
health for the ill. At the end of the ritual, the candle is extinguished. An 
example of a candle spell follows below. 


Neopaganism 35 


Sample Candle Magic Spell 
Materials needed: one pale blue candle and a pencil 


Inscribe the candle with your health problem, then on top, superimpose a “7,” 
the lower leg of which corkscrews from right to left to make three complete 
loops. Light the candle and visualize the affected area as bright red. Holding 
the image in your mind’s eye, mentally paint the area a soft, cool, healing 
green. Then say something like: 


Symbol that can cure all ills 

And healing green, bend to my will 
Eradicate the problem here 

Cast off damage, cast out fear 

And bring good health at once to me 
As I will, so mote it be 


Let the candle burn all the way down, and continue any medications pre- 
scribed by your healthcare practitioner.* 





Figure 3.7 Candle magic is practiced in many different world religions. 
This candle is decorated with Theban, an alphabet that is commonly used by 
Wiccans. 


Destruction of Illness 


A spell may be performed in which an item representing the sickness is 
burned to magically destroy the sickness. 


36 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 3.8 Responders may discover tattoos and ritual body art on patients. 


Poppets: Poppets are dolls used to represent the target of a spell. Respond- 
ers discovering these dolls may assume malevolent workings (a la Voodoo 
doll) are being performed. However, the poppet is used for healing rituals. 

Ritual Body Art: It is believed that symbols communicate a need to 
the spiritual realm. Some Wiccans in need of healing may have vari- 
ous magical symbols and colors painted onto the face, neck, chest, 
breasts, thighs and back. Symbols may represent the protection of 
deities, emotions, such as happiness or mourning, and symbols for 
healing? (Figure 3.8). 

Sweat Lodges: Some Wiccans utilize the Native American sauna known 
as the sweat lodge. Sweat lodges are typically domed-shaped huts con- 
structed from tree branches and cloth or animal skin. The inner space 
of the dome contains stones that are heated in a fire. The door to the 
lodge is closed with the participant inside. The steam inside, combined 
with burning herbs, works to purify the occupants and place them in a 
spiritual state. 


Articles of Comfort 


Amulets: Amulets are objects that provide protection when worn or car- 
ried. They may be composed of gemstones, drawings, jewelry, herbs, 
bones and/or coins. Amulets may be in the pockets of clothing or worn 
on a necklace or bracelet. 

Jewelry: Amulets and talismans may double as jewelry. Silver jewelry is 
worn to represent the goddess. The High Priestess may wear a necklace 
made from amber and jet gemstones to indicate their position in the 


Neopaganism 37 


Craft. Animal bone or claws may be worn as protective amulets. Some 
traditions present the High Priestess with a ritual garter to indicate the 
number of covens that have “hived” off from her. 

Stones: Stones link Wiccans with the Earth. Stones are believed to contain 
magical properties and can conduct energies much like a radio transmit- 
ter. Stones may be “charged” where energy is placed into the stones before 
they are worn. Some Wiccans cleanse stones in salt water to remove neg- 
ative energies. Stones may be carried in bags or worn on necklaces. 


Source of Sickness 


Psychic attacks: Some Wiccans believe that they can be magically attacked 
by enemies. For protection, they may put a protective circle around 
themselves or make a pentagram in the air. Some Wiccans may keep 
crystals on their property as protection. 

Cursed Objects: Some Wiccans believe that objects can be conductors of 
negative energy if used in malevolent rituals. A negatively charged item 
left on someone’s property can produce illness. 


Taboos 


Responders encountering a group in ritual may need to enter the ritual space. 
Allow the group to advise you when it is safe to enter. This simply shows 
courtesy toward the group’s cultural rules. Be aware that sweeping actions 
with the ritual tools may be used to banish the ritual space (Figure 3.9). 

Do not disturb altars, shrines or ritual tools unless it is necessary for 
the health of the patient. If you have a question regarding items on the altar, 





Figure 3.9 Responders may encounter rituals performed in outdoor settings. 
This ritual circle is located at the residence of a Wiccan High Priestess. 


38 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 3.10 Responders should avoid touching shrines and altars. 
such as incense, herbs or possible health-related hazards, ask other mem- 


bers at the scene to assist or ask the patient if it is okay to touch the articles 
(Figure 3.10). 


Responder Issues 





When encountering a group in ritual, realize that it may be awkward for the 
group to be seen in ritual. Some members of the group may not be public 
about their faith or they may have encountered negative reactions to their 
faith in the past. Respond in a kind and professional manner. 

Many Wiccan events and celebrations take place outdoors. Members 
may encounter heat stroke from the sun, insect bites and rashes from plants. 
Most organized events will have someone designated to assist in medical 
emergencies. The typical gathering will have someone who is a Wiccan 
healthcare professional. 

Some oils can become irritants if applied too heavily. Oil in the eyes of a 
patient can cause irritation and some oils are photosensitive and can cause 
sunburn if exposed to the sun for prolonged periods of time. 

Allow the patient to carry any necessary objects of protection that may 
give him/her comfort, such as amulets, jewelry, talismans, gemstones, etc. 

Be advised that some groups may observe their rituals within a confined 
ritual space. If herbs or incense are burned, this could cause difficulty in 
breathing for some members of the group. Some herbs like sage can be par- 
ticularly overpowering in confined spaces. 


Neopaganism 39 


Some Wiccan groups will observe sacred rituals in the nude. There is a 
possibility that responders could be called to the scene where a group is prac- 
ticing “skyclad,” a cultural term for ritual nudity. 

Although it is not a common practice, some Wiccan groups will use a 
drop of blood from a member to take an oath of initiation. The blood repre- 
sents the life force of man. This will usually be a very small amount, but the 
possibility always exists that the initiate could faint or loose too much blood 
if performed improperly. 

There are some Wiccan traditions that may utilize the use of a cord to 
bind the arms of an initiate during certain initiation rites. This cord may be 
wrapped around the arms and around the neck. Although the intent is not to 
harm the initiate, it is possible that the cord could be tied too tight or tight- 
ened accidentally. 

Some rituals may be performed to induce a trance state. Responders may 
encounter a victim who is in this state as a result of meditation, dancing or 
other forms of inducing trance. A person who acts as a medium for spiritual 
workings may also be in a trance state. If other members of the group are 
present, ask them to assist you in your communications with the victim. 

During the celebration of Beltane, some Wiccans may decide to jump 
over the fire that is burning in the cauldrons used to mark the holiday. Prac- 
titioners could accidentally receive burns from these fires. 

Responders may find health problems with Wiccans who use sweat 
lodges. Problems can occur involving heat exhaustion, dehydration and 
smoke inhalation. 


Weapons/Harmful Implements 


If a patient being treated is wearing an athame and you must remove the blade, 
advise the patient that the blade will be kept safe until medical care is com- 
pleted. It is advisable to take notes of any items you may take from the patient. 


References 


1. Clifton, Charles S., Witchcraft Today: Book One, Llewellyn Publications, 
Woodbury, MN, 1992, p. 23. 

2. Farrar, Janet and Stewart Farrar, A Witches Bible Compleat, Magickal Childe 
Publishing, Inc., New York, 1981, chap. 21. 

3. Reith, Rev. Velvet, Common Herbs for Use in Multicultural Religious/Healing 
Practices, Tennessee IAI Conference, Ritualistic Crime Workshop, 2006. 

4. Morrison, Dorothy, Everyday Moon Magic, Llewellyn Publications, Woodbury, 
MN, 2004. 

5. Arnold, Charles, Ritual Body Art: Drawing the Spirit, Phoenix Publishing, 
Blaine, WA, 1987 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 


Assessing the Scene 


You receive a call regarding a female patient who has fallen and is injured. 
She is located on a hill overlooking a local river. As you approach the scene, 
you discover a Hispanic female wrapped in blue cloth lying on a bed of rocks. 
Her head is bleeding. She is conscious, but obviously startled. As you begin to 
administer aid to the woman, you notice a wooden raft at her feet. On the raft 
is a watermelon, candles, pennies and a dead chicken. Puzzled, you look at the 
patient and she tells you “It’s my religion, don’t worry.” 


Responders who encounter members of the Santeria religion may find a num- 
ber of artifacts and rituals that appear much as Hollywood has portrayed 
Voodoo rituals in movies. However, a deeper analysis of Santeria reveals a 
complex system of beliefs, rituals and philosophies that convey a centuries- 
old religion. 

Santeria is a religion practiced by over 20,000 Americans. The religion 
was once observed in casual or consistent practice by members of only the 
Cuban, Puerto Rican and Mexican communities. However, there are now 
a number of ethnic groups that also practice the religion. Santeria is a 
“syncretic” religion that was developed through the interaction of African 
slaves and Catholic slaveholders. Syncretic religions seek to reconcile or mix 
practices of various religions. The use of syncretism allowed the religion of 
Santeria to survive through the horrors of slavery. 


History of Santeria 





The Santeria religion comes from the Yoruba people of West Africa. In the 
mid-sixteenth century, thousands of Yoruba people were kidnapped and 
taken as slaves. They were then transported to British, French, Spanish and 
Portuguese colonies in the Caribbean Islands to live and work on plantations 
as an enslaved populace. However, the West African slaves brought with them 
their Yoruba religious culture, but were eventually forced by their captors to 
abandon their religious obligation to the deities and to the practices of the 
African traditional religions. 


41 


42 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


To ensure the survival of their religion, the Yoruba slaves secretly kept 
their spiritual traditions alive. Meeting in houses known as Cabildos, the 
various groups could celebrate the rituals, songs and dances of their culture. 
The cabildos were identified by specific religious groups known as Regla. The 
Regla de Ocha was the “rule of the Orishas,” a phrase still used today to denote 
contemporary Santeria. (The Orishas are the Yoruba deities worshipped in 
Santeria.) The Yoruba people found common elements in the Roman Catho- 
lic saints of the slave owners’ religion and the indigenous deities of Africa. A 
syncretism between the saints of the Catholic Church and the African dei- 
ties known as Orishas was formed. This allowed the Yoruba slaves to use the 
saints as camouflage while still observing their religion. The groups, who 
identified with this practice, were known as Lucumi. Today the religion is 
practiced in the open with the syncretism between Orisha and saints being 
continued as a cultural tradition. Some followers have referred to the saints 
as the “costumes” that the Orishas wear in the new world. 

There is evidence that Santeria moved north of the border into the United 
States as early as 1946 when Francisco “Pancho” Mora migrated into the 
States and became the first recognized Babalawo (Santeria priest) in Amer- 
ica. Mora established a temple in the Upper West Side of New York City. In 
1959, another significant personality in Santeria history, named Walter King, 
traveled to Cuba to become initiated in the religion. King is noted as being 
the first African American to be initiated in the religion. Upon his return to 
the States, King changed his name to Oba Osejiman Adeummi and started 
the Yoruba Temple in New York City. In 1961, Mercedes Noble was ordained 
the first Santera (priestess of Santeria) in the United States. Noble, who was 
also known as Oban Yoko, opened a Casa de Santo (House of Saint), which 
became a location for ordination rites in the States. 

The Mariel Boatlift of 1980 brought several thousand Cubans to the 
South Florida shores between April and October of that year. Some trepida- 
tion followed these Cubans as they flooded into the area. As Cuban refugees 
before them, the Mariel boat people brought with them their island culture 
and religious practices. One of the cultural aspects that became apparent to 
the public eye was the practice of Santeria. Numerous public service agen- 
cies began to share information regarding the use of hand tattoos, colored 
beads and bizarre rituals by the Cuban refugees. This was one of many early 
incidents that served to create the cloud of misunderstanding that still sur- 
rounds the religion today. 

In 1992, Santeria practitioners from Hialeah, Florida protested local 
ordinances that banned ritual animal sacrifices by Santeria practitioners. 
This issue was taken to the United States Supreme Court where it was ruled 
that the city had specifically focused on Santeria and should have created 
a generalized ordinance that did not target a specific religious culture. The 
issue of animal sacrifice brought Santeria into the public spotlight where it 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 43 


received critical attention by an uneducated public. Santeria became equated 
by some with Satanism. A religion that developed from an African tradi- 
tional culture that was no stranger to animal sacrifice was looked upon by 
the local media as a savage form of pagan worship.” 

In order for responders to understand the secrecy surrounding Santeria, 
it is important to have the historical perspective. Many believers still wrestle 
with the stereotypes and prejudice that results from the media and Holly- 
wood portrayals of the religion. 


Beliefs and Practices 





The primary focus of Santeria is to introduce humanity to the Orishas that 
operate in this world. Humans are children of the Orishas and each human 
being has a personal Orisha that they are called to serve. Humans feed the 
Orishas through sacrifices and provide earthly instruction to guide other 
humans into the service of the Orishas. The Orishas likewise provide spiri- 
tual power to humans known as Ache. Ache, which is spiritual energy, can 
reside inside believers as well as inside ritual implements. 


The Deities of Santeria 


The Yoruba deities worshipped in Santeria are known as Orishas.’ According 
to Santeria mythology, the Orishas are manifestations of the creator deity 
known as Olodumare. The Orishas govern all aspects of nature and human- 
ity. For instance, the Orisha Yemaya governs the ocean waters and the human 
aspects of maternity. Santeria myths, known as Patakis, are communicated 
orally to followers to explain the mechanics of the spiritual and physical 
worlds. The Patakis tell of the creator Olodumare (who owns heaven) and of 
his son Olofi. The Orishas Olodumare, Olofi and Olorun rule over the other 
Orishas, but are not directly worshipped. The lesser Orishas live in the mate- 
rial world and serve to protect humanity. The Orishas are similar to the gods 
and goddesses of the Greeks. Each one having his/her own favorite color, 
number, food, drum rhythm and tool (Figure 4.1). 
The following are some of the more recognized Orishas in Santeria. 


Elegua 

Elegua is syncretized with Saint Anthony. Some houses may have Elegua rep- 
resented by the Spanish statue of Nino Atocha, the Christ child. He is rep- 
resented by a cement head with cowrie shells for the eyes, nose, and mouth. 
Elegua owns the keys to the spiritual realm and is called upon at the begin- 
ning of rituals to open the doorway to the spiritual world. The icon of Elegua 
may be found sitting on a terra cotta plate. This indicates stability. Responders 


44 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 4.1 Shown are various ritual artifacts representing the deities of the 
Santeria religion. Many of these objects may be observed throughout the homes 
of practitioners. (Courtesy of Webb County Sheriff’s Department, Laredo. 
Texas.) 





Figure 4.2 A shrine to the Orisha Elegua. Offerings to the deity include candy, 
rum and money. 


may see the icon of Elegua placed near doorways. His image may be found 
along with a red and black beaded stick with a crook and he may be wearing a 
small straw hat. His shrine may also contain toys and candy representing his 
childlike nature. He may have other manifestations in the forms of coconuts, 
seashells and large rocks (Figure 4.2). 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 45 


Ogun 

Ogun is syncretized with Saint Peter. He is the divine ironworker and patron 
of ironworkers. Ogun is represented by an iron cauldron filled with materi- 
als, such as iron spikes, chains and other implements. These items are typi- 
cally covered in Corojo (palm oil) butter. Green and black colored items will 
be found in his shrine as well. Ogun’s patron animal is the dog, so many 
shrines contain stuffed animals and statues of dog images. The ceremonial 
knife that is used to commit animal sacrifices is often placed inside the caul- 
dron of Ogun. 


Ochosi 

Hunting and justice are governed by the god Ochosi. Ochosi is syncretized 
with Saint Norbert. He is represented by a small or large metal crossbow. 
Responders may see the crossbow of Ochosi hanging near the door to a 
home. Some shrines for Ochosi hold deer antlers and handcuffs. Ochosi arti- 
facts may be violet in color. 


Oshun 

Oshun is syncretized with Our Lady of La Caridad del Cobre. She is the god- 
dess of love and sexuality. She also governs matters of money and rules over 
the river waters. Her shrines contain materials made from copper, fans, mir- 
rors, ducks and boats or other river-related items. Honey may be placed on 
the altar as well as apple cider. Her color is yellow. 


Obatala 

This Orisha is syncretized with Our Lady of Mercy. Obatala is the father 
of the Orishas, and is frequently referred to as Father of the White Cloth. 
Obatala is said to “own” the head of humans and is represented by anything 
white, such as cotton, doves and eggs. 


Chango 

This fiery Orisha is syncretized with Saint Barbara and represents fire, 
thunder and lightning. Chango was an actual king in Africa who was dei- 
fied after his death. Chango’s shrine contains his wooden double-bladed ax 
and sword. Images of Saint Barbara may be placed in homes to represent 
Chango. The statue may hold a sword that can be placed in an upward or 
downward position. It is said that the sword pointing upward represents a 
time of defense in the life of the statue’s owner. Chango’s colors are red and 
white (see Figure 4.3). 


Oya 

Oya is syncretized with Our Lady of Candelaria and Saint Theresa. Oya owns 
the cemeteries, winds and storms. Shrines to Oya contain masks, spears and 
nine copper bracelets. Her colors are maroon and nine various other colors. Her 


46 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 4.3 A statue known as Chango Macho is used in spiritual workings. 
(Courtesy of Webb County Sheriff's Department, Laredo, Texas.) 


shrine may contain her crown with nine charms, including a hoe, pick, gourd, 
lightning bolt, scythe, shovel, rake, axe and mattock (an agricultural tool). 


Yemaya 

Yemaya is syncretized with Our Lady of Regla (Regla is a province in Cuba). 
This Orisha is considered to be the mother over the Orishas. Her name means 
“our mother whose children are the fish.” Yemaya rules over seas and will be 
found in the form of seashells, mermaids, boats and other water-based items. 
Yemaya’s colors are white and blue (Figure 4.4). 


Babalu-Aye 

This Orisha is syncretized with Saint Lazarus. Babalu-Aye is a title that means 
father. Babalu-Aye is a special Orisha to those who are dealing with sickness, 
as he owns the cure to sickness. He may also cause sickness. While he is his- 
torically associated with leprosy and smallpox, his contemporary association 
has also taken on AIDS as a sickness that he heals and causes. The shrines 
to Babalu-Aye may contain a pair of crutches as well as sackcloth. His shrine 
may also carry a beaded fly whisk known as the Aja. His color is purple. 


Olokun 

The Orisha Olokun is commonly called “Yemaya at the bottom of the ocean.” 
The Orisha is a hermaphrodite being that is represented by an iron figure 
holding a sea snake anda mask. The artifacts of the Orisha Olokun are placed 
on the floor to mirror the bottom of the ocean. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 47 





Figure 4.4 The soperas of Yemaya and Oshun. These two Orishas are tradition- 
ally placed beside each other. Offerings of honey are placed in Oshun’s presence 
to represent her sweet nature. Yemaya is flanked by seashells, mermaids and 
other items representing the ocean waters. 


Orula/Orunmila 

Orula is syncretized with Saint Francis of Assisi, and is the divine diviner. 
He owns the tools of divination that are used by the High Priest known as 
the Babalawo. He is represented by the divination tools called the Table of Ifa 
and the Okuele. His colors are green and yellow. 


Osain 

Osain is syncretized with Saint Raphael, and governs the forest and herbs. 
He is called upon to provide medicine for healing. Osain may be found in 
the form of a male figure with one arm, one leg and one ear. Osain is also 
depicted as a beaded gourd that may be decorated with feathers. His colors 
are the colors of all the Orishas. 


The Ibejis 

The Ibejis are the sacred twin Orishas. They are syncretized with Saint Cosme 
and Saint Damian. The Yoruba used these figures to represent the spirits of 
dead twins. In Santeria, the Ibejis are the sons of Chango. They will be found 
in the form of twin dolls or statues. 


Aganyu 
Aganyu is syncretized with Saint Christopher. He represents Earth forces, 
such as volcanoes and earthquakes. His shrines may contain depictions of 


48 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


a volcano. Aganyu is depicted in some myths as the father of Chango. His 
color is red. 


Inle 

Inle is syncretized with the archangel Raphael. Inle is the healer of the Orishas 
and is the patron of doctors and fishermen. Inle lost his tongue to Yemaya, 
so he must speak through the shells of Yemaya. A silver cross ornament is 
kept in his shrine to represent his presence. The cross has two snakes and 
two small fish hanging from its arms. The post of the cross has two snakes 
wrapped around it. Objects connected to fishing, such as a net and fishing 
line, may be found in his shrine. Inle is the owner of medicine. His colors are 
blue, yellow and white. 


Oko 

Oko is the owner the Earth and agriculture. He is represented by a minia- 
ture wagon and oxen. Oko will also be represented by a Spanish roof tile as 
his shrine. 

There are literally hundreds of Orishas as well as many other significant 
characters of great importance to those who follow them. These spiritual 
“personalities” are popular among practitioners of Espiritismo (Spanish 
for “spiritualism”). 

One is El Negro Jose. Jose is used in the Orisha groups that use espiri- 
tismo. Jose is a statue of an elderly African man sitting in a chair. Sometimes 
he may be found leaning on a crooked staff. It is believed that spirits speak 
through his statue. He also may be used for spiritual protection. 

Another spiritual figure that may be seen in statue form is known as 
La Madama. La Madama is depicted as an African woman wearing a dress, 
hoop earrings and a scarf on her head. Madama is a spiritual protector. 


The Ancestors 


Ancestor reverence in African religions has erroneously been labeled “ances- 
tor worship” by many Western sources. World cultures including Asian, 
African, Indian and several others practice rituals and have sacred spaces 
devoted to the ancestors. These are not spaces where members “worship” 
ancestors, but areas that show a respect through aesthetics. In Santeria, the 
ancestors are called Eggun. The Eggun are recognized in the lives of devotees 
as being the spirits of the family members or members of the religious com- 
munity who have died. The Eggun are recognized in rituals and in altars, 
and some Santeria practitioners will create a sacred space for the ancestors. 
The space is usually created in a dark place, such as a basement or bathroom. 
The space is marked off with chalk called Efun. Sacred marks are drawn on 
the ground and a staff is placed in the space. The staff is decorated with nine 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 49 





Figure 4.5 Respect for dead ancestors is a concept found in many African tra- 
ditional religions. Responders may observe the Boveda, the shrine for ancestral 
spirits. The shrine includes nine glasses of water representing spirits and a cru- 
cifix representing Jesus Christ and the head of the spirits. 


colored ribbons with bells attached to the ribbons. Offerings of coffee and 
fruit may be placed in this space. The Eggun may be represented by a doll 
that is dressed in the colors of the ancestor’s Orisha. 

Many Santeria practitioners will have an altar called the Boveda. The 
Boveda is usually in the form of a table covered in a white cloth representing 
purity. There are nine glasses of water on the table surrounding a larger glass 
of water containing a crucifix. The Boveda is also decorated with flowers, 
photographs of the deceased and items related to the deceased. The Boveda 
is a sacred space and should not be touched or violated by nonpractitioners 
(Figure 4.5). 


Group Structure 





There are several branches of the religion known as Ramas throughout the 
United States. Ramas go by such names as La Pimienta, Culo Verde and 
Efunche. These traditions can be traced back to historical sources, and they 
have preserved specific practices and customs through the lineage. 

The group structure in Santeria uses the traditional family as a model. 
Initiates become the children of the parental clergy. A new member who has 
not undergone any sort of initiation in Santeria is known in the commu- 
nity as Aleyo, which means outsider. Once a person has undergone initia- 
tion into the religion, he/she will be recognized first as a Santero (priest) or 


50 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Santera (priestess). The initiate is able to conduct rituals and access secret 
knowledge of spellwork and magic. They will also be referred to as a spiritual 
godchild known as Ahijado to the initiating priest or priestess. The godpar- 
ent is then referred to as the Padrino (godfather) or Madrina (godmother) of 
the initiate. 

Once the initiate has received the Orisha, they are recognized as being 
a Babalocha or lyalocha. This title designates that the initiate is a priest or 
priestess of a specific Orisha. 

The High Priest in Santeria is known as Babalawo, which means “father 
of the secrets.” According to Santeria theology, only males can be Babalawos. 
The Babalawo can call upon Orun and perform divination. The Yoruba use a 
divination system known as Ifa; a very complex system of divination that takes 
years to learn. The Babalawo is considered a master of this type of divination. 

The Babalawo uses a necklace called the Okuele. This chain is made of 
eight shells, palm nuts, bone and other materials. The chain is “thrown” 
onto a table or onto a mat on the floor and the Orishas speak through the 
pattern that the chain displays. There are 256 possible combinations of pat- 
terns called Letras, which are associated with a collection of proverbs. These 
proverbs contain advice on specific situations and, based on the proverb, the 
Babalawo may suggest an offering or rituals for a remedy.’ 


Rituals and Ceremonies 





To understand the mechanics of the Santeria faith, it is important to know 
the various stages of initiation that members may attain. 


Receiving the Necklaces 


The first initiation ceremony is a Catholic baptism. However, the first initia- 
tion into the Santeria faith is performed strictly by a Santeria clergyman and 
known as “receiving the necklaces.” 

Called Elekes (collares in Spanish), the necklaces are sacred pieces of jew- 
elry that put the initiate under the protection of the Orishas. The necklaces 
appear in different colors with varying numbers of beads on each strand. The 
color and number of beads refer to one of the many Orishas in the Santeria 
pantheon. The beads are typically 2-mm plastic beads that are strung on cot- 
ton cloth. The Santero, who performs a ritual over the necklaces, prepares the 
beads. The ritual gives the necklaces Ache, which transforms the beads from 
ordinary pieces of plastic into sacred symbols of power. The necklaces are 
washed in the sacred liquid known as Omiero (made from herbs, water [rain 
water, river water, ocean water, holy water] and steeped with a hot coal). 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 51 





Figure 4.6 A Santero wearing the traditional white clothing and Elekes of the 
Santeria faith. Responders should avoid touching the sacred necklaces known as 
Elekes. If necessary, ask the patient to remove them. 


The believer receives the necklaces as a means of spiritual protection. 
The wearing of these beads publicly identifies the initiate as being dedicated 
to the Orishas. The believer will initially receive the necklaces of Obatala, 
Chango, Oshun, Yemaya and Elegua (Figure 4.6). 

The most common versions of the Orishas’ elekes are 


Elegua: His necklace is made of black and red beads usually in combina- 
tions of three. 

Yemaya: Her colors are white and blue and are usually in combinations 
of seven. 

Ogun: His colors are green and black. Many times a translucent green 
bead is used to indicate the initiate has “received the knife” of Ogun. 
The pattern is usually in seven or three. 

Chango: His colors are red and white and are found in combinations of six. 

Orula: His colors are green and yellow and most often arranged in pat- 
terns of one. 

Oshun: Her colors are yellow and white and are found in combinations 
of five. 

Babalu-Aye: His colors are purple and white. 


The necklaces are treated with respect and are not to be worn while 
drinking alcohol or during sexual relations. If the necklace breaks apart, this 
is a sign that the Orisha has blocked something negative from happening to 
the initiate. 


52 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Practitioners may also receive a special beaded bracelet known as the 
Mano de Orula or Hand of Orula. This green and yellow bracelet is given by 
a Babalawo and is said to protect the owner from death (Iku). 


Warriors 


After an initiate has received the necklaces, the next step of initiation is to 
gain the protection of the Warriors, also known as Los Guerreros. This is a 
group of Orishas (Elegua, Ochosi, Ogun and Osun) that defend the initiate. 

In Santeria myths known as Patakis, these gods travel together and the 
artifacts representing the Orishas are presented to the initiate in a ceremony. 
Elegua is presented in the form of a cement head with cowrie shells for facial 
features. Ogun is the Orisha governing iron. He is given to the initiate in the 
form of an iron cauldron. Ochosi is presented in the form of a metal cross- 
bow. And, finally, Osun is given to the new initiate in the form of a metal 
chalice adorned with bells and a small metal rooster on its lid. Responders 
will see Osun placed near the doorway of a home and preferably at a high 
location. This allows Osun to watch out for danger. If the tool of Osun falls 
over, this means danger is coming. The chalice of Osun contains a hidden 
compartment that can be accessed by twisting the top of the chalice. The 
compartment contains powdered eggshell (Cascarila), stones, herbs and 
other items. 

Receiving the warriors gives the initiate the spiritual protection of these 
Orishas. The warriors are kept inside the initiate’s house and are to be “fed” 
offerings and sacrifices on a regular basis. Elegua is the first to be fed because 
he is the Orisha that opens the doorway to the spiritual realm. If Elegua is 
not fed first, the other Orishas may not be able to receive their offerings. Cold 
water is dripped onto his image to call his spirit. The priest who has presented 
the warriors to the initiate will perform a ritual in which a rooster is sacri- 
ficed in front of the warriors and then the deities are invited into the house in 
which they will reside. This ceremony is known as Ebbo de Entrada. 


Cofa 


Santeria teaches that man is guarded by a particular Orisha. This is similar 
to the concept of having a guardian angel. The Orisha is determined by a 
ceremony known as Cofa. The Orisha that is determined to be the personal 
guardian of the initiate is known as “owning the head.” It is only after this 
determination is made can the Orisha be “crowned” onto the individual in 
the ceremony known as Ocha. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 53 


Kariocha 


The major ceremony in which the initiate receives the personal protection of an 
Orisha is called Kariocha, which is a Lucumi word that means “put the Ocha 
on the head.” This ceremony is also known as “making the saint.” The ritual 
consists of the guardian Orisha being “crowned” onto the head of the initiate. 

Kariocha leads the initiate through a spiritual rebirth. The initiate is given 
the tools to interact with the Orishas: the stones (Otans), the shells (Manos) 
and the tools (Herramintes) are placed inside ceramic vessels (Soperas). 

During the ceremony (which can be very tedious), the initiate’s head is 
cut open to receive the Orishas, along with the tools of the Orishas. The tools 
are placed above the head of the initiate inside the Sopera while songs are 
sung in the Lucumi tongue. (Trance possession can occur during this section 
of the rite.) The initiate’s head is painted with symbols of the Orishas and an 
animal is rubbed over the body of the initiate and then sacrificed. The animal 
sacrificed differs according to the Orisha; for example, a rooster may be given 
for a child of Elegua. 

The initiate then is taken to a river to be introduced and bathed by Oshun, 
the goddess of the river. The initiate removes his/her clothes and is bathed 
with the river water. Offerings are placed in the river, such as flowers, food and 
honey. Oshun takes the items to heaven to announce the birth of a new initi- 
ate. The initiate reaches into the river and retrieves a stone. (This sacred stone 
is seen as a home to the spirits. The myths of the Yoruba say that the Orishas 
descend to Earth in raindrops that fall into the river and land on stones. These 
stones are considered receptacles of spiritual power.) The stone is placed into a 
pot where it will act as a bridge between the Orishas and the initiate. 

The ritual is a very complex ceremony that ends in a rite called the 
Asiento. The Asiento is the actual “seating” of the Orisha into the initiate. 
During this ritual is when the head of the initiate is cut with a small blade. 
The cut has several herbs applied to it to “crown” the essence of the Orisha 
into the head of the initiate. The initiate’s head (Ori) is fed the blood of an 
animal as well as other ingredients, such as cocoa butter and coconut. The 
Orisha is then “seated” in the initiate’s head. 

The following day is known as the Middle Day. The initiate sits and eats 
lunch at a table prepared for him. After the lunch, the initiate is dressed in an 
outfit that contains the colors of the Orisha that he has received. A drumming 
ceremony follows in which the initiate is presented to the Santeria community. 

The day after Middle Day is known as the Day of Ita. Ita is a reading per- 
formed by a gifted diviner. The diviner gives the initiate a list of taboos and a 
reading regarding the spiritual mother or father of the initiate. The details of 
this ceremony are recorded in a book known as the Liberta. This book is later 
given to the initiate after the completed initiation process. 


54 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 4.7 The Sopera contains the “secrets” of the Orishas. The sacred stone, 
known as the Otan, is kept inside these vessels. 


The initiate is dressed in white and must wear this color for a year. His 
head must remain covered and there are several restrictions placed on him. 
Restrictions involving sexual activity, diet and interaction with outsiders are 
usually listed in these taboos. 

After three months, a sacrifice known as Ebbo Meta (or Three Month Ebbo) 
is performed. The initiate’s hair is cut for the first time since the initiation. 

The secrets of the Orishas are placed in Soperas, typically ceramic or 
wooden bowls that will be colored in a specific color that designates an Ori- 
sha (Figure 4.7). These bowls are kept in the homes of practitioners. The stone 
inside is routinely bathed in water and herbs. Animals may be sacrificed and 
the blood of the animal poured upon the stones. These are sacred objects and 
are treated as if the gods themselves were sitting in the bowls. The Soperas 
may be kept in wooden cabinets called Canastilleros. 

At this point, the initiate becomes known as Omo Orisha or Child of 
the Orisha. 


Obi 


In order to communicate with the Orishas, Santeria practitioners use a tool 
known as an Obi. Use of the Obi is known as Darle Coco al Santo, which 
means “give coconut to the saint.” Four pieces of coconut are “thrown” and 
the Orishas speak through the pattern in which the pieces land. There are 
five possible combinations in which the shells may land (Figure 4.8 and 
Figure 4.9). 

There are five possible patterns in which the shells can fall. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 55 





Figure 4.8 The Orishas speak to practitioners through the coconut shells 
known as the Obi. 





Figure 4.9 The coconut shells (Obi) are “thrown” after the Orisha is given three 
drops of water. 


56 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


1. All white sides up—Alafia. This means a positive “yes.” 

2. All brown sides up—Oyekun. This means “no” and possibly death. 

3. Three white sides and one brown side up—Itagua. This is an uncertain 
answer and the rinds are thrown again. 

4. Two white sides up and two brown sides up—Ellife. This means a definite 

yes. 

5. Three brown sides up and one white side up—Okana Sode. This means 

“no,” but may also mean death. 


Diloggun 


Another form of communication that is used to interact with the Orishas 
is the Diloggun, which is a system of divination that uses 16 cowrie shells 
as a means of hearing the gods. These shells are given to the initiate when 
he/she receives the otanes and soperas. The cowries, known as Caracoles, 
are “thrown” and land in various patterns. (The open side of the shell is the 
mouth of the Orisha.) The patterns are then interpreted by matching the par- 
ticular pattern with a pattern known as the Odu. Initiates are traditionally 
trained by a divination specialist called the Italero. 


Patakis 


Believers are also taught about the Orishas and how to serve them through 
stories called Patakis. These are legends about the personalities and adven- 
tures of the Orishas. These stories instruct the believers on the specific pow- 
ers Orishas can exert. 


Offerings and Sacrifices 


The practice of Santeria requires adherents to utilize the concept of offerings 
and sacrifices in interacting with the Orishas. The Orishas require minor 
offerings that are known as Adimu and sacrifices known as Ebbo. The Ori- 
shas may ask for sacrifices as a form of exchange in order to carry out requests 
(Figure 4.10). 


Addimu 

Addimus are small offerings to the Orishas. These can be foods, candles, 
candy and other materials. They are usually found on plates and in bowls in 
front the objects that represent Orishas. 


Elegua is given corn meal with palm oil known as Manteca de Corojo, 
okra, coconuts, smoked fish (known as Eya), a bush rat (known as 
Jutia), toasted corn and candy. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 57 





Figure 4.10 An example of offerings to the Orishas. 


Ogun is given green plantains and the gifts that Elegua requests. The sap- 
odilla fruit is his favorite food. 

Obatala is given eggwhites beaten with sugar as well as rice and vanilla 
puddings, milk and other white foods. 

Chango is given a dish of okra and cornmeal cooked together, along with 
red apples and green bananas in groups of six. 

Yemaya is given sweet plantains and pork rinds. Shrimp, dried coconut, 
white pears and okra are also found in her Addimu. 

Oshun is given pumpkin, shrimp, eggs, spices, and raw fish. Honey is usu- 
ally poured over the Addimu. 

Oya is given eggplants and okra with cornmeal. 

Babalu-aye is given cigars and the drink aguardiente. He also likes coco- 
nut butter, milk and bread. 

Inle is given sweet wine and cake. 


Ebbo 





Perhaps the most misunderstood aspect of Santeria is the practice of animal 
sacrifice. This is known as Ebbo. The Ebbo is a sacrifice that gives the Orisha 
the energy found in the animal in exchange for the energy of the Orisha 
known as Ache. The blood that is given is called Eje. 

There are particular stipulations that are followed in order to offer a sac- 
rifice. The initiate that gives an Ebbo must first receive the knife used in the 
sacrifice in a ceremony called the Pinaldo. The knife is said to belong to the 


58 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Orisha Ogun. In fact, the ceremonial sacrifice is blamed on Ogun. The ani- 
mal’s blood is usually dripped onto the stones or tools that represent the Ori- 
sha. A prayer known as the Moyuba is spoken in the native Lucumi tongue. 

The meat of the animals that are sacrificed is cleaned, cooked and eaten 
by the participants of the ritual. There is a saying, La Sangre para El Santo, 
la carne para el Santero, which translates: Blood for the saint, meat for the 
Santero. However, animals that are used to remove sickness or curses may 
not be eaten. 

Each Orisha has a particular animal that is to be sacrificed for him or her. 


Elegua is fed rum, cigars, turtles, goats, roosters and opossum. 
Chango is offered goats, turtles, quail, roosters and rams. 
Babalu-Aye is fed goats, roosters and pigeons. 

Oshun prefers yellow hens and female goats. 

Ogun is fed opossum, roosters, goats, pigeons and sometimes dogs. 
Yemaya is given ducks, turtles, rams and roosters. 

Oya is fed female goats, pigeons, hens and any black animals. 
Aggayu is fed castrated goats, guinea hens and pigeons. 

Obatala is fed female goats, hens, doves and guinea fowl. 


Trance Possession 


Responders that encounter certain Santeria ceremonies may witness a cul- 
tural phenomenon known as “trance possession.” Trance possession is a 
practice observed by many world religions, and involves a practitioner open- 
ing him or herself up to a spiritual presence, such as a god or a spirit. The 
consciousness of the practitioner is taken over by the spirit allowing the spirit 
to use the practitioner as a conduit to communicate with the physical world. 
In this state, practitioners may espouse wisdom from the gods or even per- 
form miracles. Scientific explanations of this activity say that this “altered 
state” of consciousness is a result of deep hypnosis from the drumming and 
singing that accompanies the ritual. One medical explanation has alleged 
that repeated auditory stimuli, such as drumming, can affect the central ner- 
vous system and the right hemisphere of the brain. 

In Santeria, the possession of humans by the Orishas is described as 
Subirse el Santo a su caballo, translated as: “The saint climbs upon his horse.” 
The presence of the Orisha at a ceremony is evidence that the Orisha has been 
pleased with the ceremony. 

I have personally been told some very powerful stories about trance pos- 
session during Santeria ceremonies. One young lady shared her testimony of 
how she was healed ofa brain tumor during an act of possession. Some stories 
tell of details of the Orishas using people to perform miraculous acts, such as 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 59 


eating and drinking hot food and liquids without being burned. Responders 
should understand that although trance possession may appear very “devi- 
ant” to outsiders, it is very much a part of the Santeria culture. 

Responders that encounter scenes involving possession should be advised 
that these situations should be carefully approached. Signs that possession is 
occurring include: 


e The presence of drumming, chanting and singing. 

e The presence of a crowd of practitioners surrounding a single practitio- 
ner. Practitioners dressed in colorful clothing and handling large arti- 
facts of the Orishas. 

e During the possession by Ogun, the practitioner may swing a machete 
around to depict his character. 

e Practitioners dancing or shaking in erratic manners. Possession may 
appear as a choreographed dance or violent rolling around on the floor. 
Possession by Elegua appears in the form of a dance in which the Ori- 
sha causes the practitioner to stand on one foot and twirl around. 

e Display of supernatural acts, including consumption and handling of 
hot foods and substances. 

e Increase in intensity of drumming and singing. This is to “call down” 
the Orisha. 


Responders should not touch a practitioner exhibiting signs of trance 
possession. To touch the practitioner during possession can be viewed as 
interfering with the gods and can result in reactive behavior. 

Most likely the ritual would be stopped due to the presence of outsiders. 
However, if you discover that you need to interact with someone at the scene 
of this ritualistic activity, it is advised that you address the leadership of the 
group. There is a culturally acceptable technique for the leadership to stop 
the act of possession without the responder violating a cultural taboo. 


Espiritismo 





A number of Santeria practitioners use a system of practices commonly 
referred to as Spiritism or, in the Latin American community, as Espiritismo. 
The practices are derived from the works of a nineteenth century French 
educator named Hippolyte Rivail, who is known by his pseudonym, Allan 
Kardec. Kardec organized a number of metaphysical practices that involved 
techniques to communicate with the dead. He popularized practices, such 
as spirit channeling and table tipping. Kardec’s book, The Spirit’s Book, fea- 
tures a number of questions regarding the work of spirits. The book is usu- 
ally sold in Botanicas (retail stores that sell folk medicine, religious candles 


60 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


and statuary, amulets and other products regarded as magical) and supply 
stores for the Santeria faith. Practitioners may leave Kardec’s books on their 
Boveda. Spiritism became an additional practice of Santeria when it caught 
on in areas such as Cuba and Puerto Rico. 

Espiritismo uses doctrines and teachings of Christian and Spiritualist 
texts and combines elements of African and Latin indigenous teachings. 
Teachings usually claim that there is one creator God and several spirits 
created by God. The practice also teaches that the soul survives after death. 
After several stages of reincarnation, the soul may become a saint. Some spir- 
its are known as Causas, which may cause problems in the lives of the living. 
Each person has several guardian spirits. Practitioners hold séances known 
as Sesion Espiritista in which the spirits of the dead may appear. The séance is 
held at a table covered in a white tablecloth known as the Mesa Blanca. White 
candles, white flowers and a bowl of water are placed on the table. The bowl 
of water is used to capture negative energies, which may manifest as bubbles 
in the bowl. 

A practitioner may fall into a trance and become possessed by the spirit 
of the dead. Practitioners known as “mediums” act as channels for the spir- 
its. There are a number of mediums, including those who can see spirits, 
hear spirits and see the future. Prayers from Kardec’s books are read. Spirits 
of different cultures may also manifest themselves. Spirits known as Mad- 
amas, who are West African women; Gitanas, who are gypsies; Indios, who 
are Indians; Piratas, who are pirates; and Congos, who are Africans can 
appear. Spiritual masses, known as Misa Espiritual, are conducted by Sante- 
ria clergy. 

Responders who encounter Espiritism rituals may observe trance pos- 
session and should avoid physical contact during acts of possession. This 
may appear to practitioners as an offense toward the spirits if the possessed 
are touched. Responders should address the leadership of the group to assist 
them in ending the session. 

The medium may use the highly flammable “Florida Water” cologne to 
cleanse him or herself of negative energies. 


Brujeria 





The term Brujeria refers to the malevolent use of traditional tools of Santeria. 
This spell is known as a Trabajo, which means work. Dolls may be used to 
represent the victim of harmful magic. The Orishas may be called upon to 
perform horrendous acts on the enemies of practitioners. Dead animals may 
be left in front of the home of the intended victim. Responders may discover 
people who feel that they have been victims of Brujeria. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 61 


Holy Days 





There are several different types of ceremonies performed in the Santeria com- 

munity. One of the most popular is a celebration called the Bembe. Bembe 

means party in the Lucumi language. It is usually a drumming festival held 

in honor of Orishas. The ceremony may also be called a Tambor, which is a 

Spanish word denoting the fact that drumming ceremonies may be used in 

ceremonies. The days of celebration coincide with Catholic saints’ days. 
Following is a list of Orishas and their celebration days: 








Orisha Catholic Saint Feast Day 
Elegua Saint Anthony June 13 
Orula San Francisco Assisi October 4 
Obatala Virgin de las Mercedes September 24 
Chango Saint Barbara December 4 
Ogun Saint Peter June 29 
Ochosi Saint Norbert June 6 
Babalu-Aye Saint Lazarus December 17 
Yemaya Virgin de la Regla September 7 
Oshun La Caridad del Cobre September 8 
Oya Saint Teresa February 2 
Ibeji Saint Cosmo and Damien September 26 
Inle Saint Rafael September 29 





The drums used in the Bembe are sacred objects that are believed to con- 
tain spirits. The drums, known as the Bata, are three double-headed hour- 
glass drums, and are consecrated and given a spirit known as Ana. Animals 
and offerings are presented to the drums. Drummers play a specific “call” in 
order to invite the Orishas to manifest by possessing a believer. A Bembe cer- 
emony, known as Wemilere, is a ceremony using consecrated Bata drums. 

One room used during the Bembe usually holds the throne of the Orisha. 
This room is often decorated in colorful banners and cloths spread across 
the walls and ceilings. There is also a tureen that holds the Orisha inside on 
the throne. If the celebration is an Asiento for the initiate, the Iyawo will be 
found sitting on the throne. There is a large offering of cakes and other items 
usually in the color of the Orisha. This is known as the Plaza. There are also 
fruit and vegetable offerings to the Orisha found on the floor. A basket filled 
with money, called the Derecho, is usually amidst the offering and is used to 
help pay for all the food, tools and time put into the celebration. At the base of 
the basket is a straw mat that visitors must fall down upon and show respect 
to the Orisha. A maraca or a bell is used to rattle or ring to call the Orisha. 


62 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


The birthday of the initiate is celebrated every year. A celebration is held 
to commemorate the day that the initiate received the Orisha. Deserts, food 
and drinks are given to the Orisha, and shrines are built to display the objects 
and tureens of the Orisha. 


Itutu 





When a Santero dies, an elaborate ceremony called the Itutu is performed. 
This ceremony, performed by the community Santeros, takes one year to 
complete. The deceased is dressed in the clothing that belongs to his guard- 
ian Orisha. The tools of the Santero are broken apart and placed where the 
Orishas dictate. 


Sacred Spaces 





The sacred spaces used in Santeria typically include the tureens that house 
the Orishas as well as the numerous artifacts that are their tools. Respond- 
ers may see the colorful tureens covered in cloths and beads throughout the 
residence of a Santeria practitioner. The shelves of a bookcase or dining room 
table may be decorated with the objects of the Orishas. Some homes will keep 
the warriors behind the doorway of the home for protection. 

There are some objects that may be hung in the home, such as the talis- 
man of Osain and the crossbow of Ochosi. Responders should note the pres- 
ence of these items so as not to accidentally bump into them while respond- 
ing to the scene. 


Healing and Sickness 





There are a number of cultural explanations as to the source of illness. The 
explanation is that the sickness is a punishment from God. The second cause 
of sickness is a punishment from the Orishas. Disobedience to an Orisha can 
become a cause of illness; someone using Brujeria against a patient can be the 
cause of sickness; lack of Ache can cause sickness; and, finally, the spirits of 
the dead (Eggun) also can cause health problems. 

For healing, Santeria practitioners may consult the local Botanica, which 
serves as a supply shop for herbs and religious supplies. Santeros in the local 
community may also be consulted, and they may use divination to diagnose 
the illness. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 63 


Practitioners can suffer injury from disobeying the Orishas as well. Some 
of the divine punishments from the Orishas include: 


Aganyu: Breaking neck, crushing body 
Elegua: Misfortune, accidents 

Inle: Madness 

Obatala: Paralysis 

Ogun: Problems with links, accidents involving iron 
Olokun: Drowning, respiratory problems 
Orula: Madness 

Osain: Nervous system problems 

Oshun: Problem with genitals and womb 
Babaluaye: Skin infections 

Chango: Accidents with fire, eyesight problems 
Yemaya: Problems with the intestine 


Responders may discover that practitioners have several cultural terms 
for illnesses. Understanding these terms can assist responders in attending to 
the needs of practitioners. Some of the more common terms used to describe 
illnesses are 


Aro Otonowa — sickness from the sky 

Aro Elese Olodumare — sickness from the hands of God 
Aro Else Ocha — debt to santo that has to be repaid 

Aro Elese Eleda — sick because of disobedience 


Methods of Healing 


There are several remedies used in Santeria to heal illnesses. One of the most 
common forms of healing involves a “head cleansing.” The head, known as 
Ori, is considered the location of the soul and of the Orisha in an initiate. 
The Rogacion de Cabeza is a ritual cleansing that involves the Santero using 
a number of elements to cleanse the head. Grated coconut, powdered egg- 
shell, cotton, and cocoa butter are made into a paste. These items represent 
Obatala, the father of purity. The items are placed on the head, neck, arms, 
knees and feet of the patient. Prayers are spoken to ask for cleansing. A coco- 
nut is broken and is used in the paste and the other portion is kept to use in 
divination. The patient’s head is covered in the paste and wrapped in white 
cloth. The patient sleeps overnight with the wrap intact. The Santero uses the 
coconut to ask the Orishas if the cleansing is acceptable. 


64 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


The Elekes may need to be refreshed in order to provide Ache. The neck- 
laces are soaked in an herb liquid known as Omiero (see Santeria Herbalism) 
or in a glass of water. 

The Santero may prescribe magical baths, which contain perfumes, flow- 
ers, cascarilla and holy water, for the patient to receive spiritual strength. The 
patient may also need to receive artifacts like the Elekes or the Warriors. 


Santeria Herbalism 

Herbs play a major part in many African religious traditions. Santeria is no 
exception. The power of herbs is said to have come from the forest that is 
home to the medicines used by the indigenous healers of Africa and the New 
World healers of Santeria. While herbs and the healing power of the Orishas 
are powerful in the lives of believers, most practitioners do not refuse the 
assistance of Western medicine in healing. However, there are some spiritual 
issues that can only be solved by the Orishas and magical herb work. 

The word Ewe is the Yoruba word used to describe herbs, plants and 
trees. The herbs contain Ache and are used in fresh and dried forms. (Fresh 
green herbs are said to hold more Ache.) Herbs are usually purchased from 
local Botanicas where there is at least one person who is an expert in herbs. 
Each Ewe belongs to a specific Orisha. It is in concert with these Orishas that 
the herbs have the most power. 

The Orisha Osain is the “lord” over herbal work. In Santeria mythology, 
Osain is a one-legged, one-armed, one-eyed being. He is called upon to give 
the power of herbal magic to practitioners. 

Some Santeria practitioners are said to be born with the “gift of Osain,” 
which means that they are natural born herbalists. Responders may discover 
an artifact known as the Talisman of Osain hanging in or near the homes of 
practitioners. The talisman is a gourd or round clay vessel that is filled with 
various materials, including animal blood, herbs, water and other ingredi- 
ents. The talisman may have a feather hanging from it or it may be deco- 
rated in numerous colored beads. The talisman gives the owner the powers 
of herbal magic from Osain and can guide them in spellwork. 

Herbs are used in the healing rites known as Despojos and may be bun- 
dled and passed over the body to remove sickness and bring positive energy. 
Herbs can be placed in bathwater to create healing. 

The responder may discover jars or bottles filled with murky appear- 
ing liquids. The Omiero is a liquid that is sacred to the Santeria faith, and 
is composed of twenty-one herbs, rum, palm oil, powdered eggshell, honey, 
pepper, kola nuts and the blood of animals. It is used to “refresh” the Elekes 
(necklaces) and the Otanes (stones). 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 65 


Some of the common herbal remedies used in Santeria include: 





Folk Name Botanical Name 
Albahaca Basil 


Used to remove headaches; may be crushed to stop 
stomachaches or made into a tea 





Alcanfor Camphor 
Used to remove evil 


Anise Anise seed 
Tea made from anise relaxes and eliminates fatigue 

Atipola Hogweed 
Used to foretell the future 

Espartillo Sporobolus 
Used to protect against evil 

Manzanilla Chamomile 
Good for the stomach as well as a sedative 

Maravilla Witch hazel 
A natural astringent used to make a tea that cures colic 

Mejorana Marjoram 
Used as a tea to ease labor pains 

Rompe Saraguey Siam weed 
Used against evil 


Yerba Buena Spearmint 
Cleanses bad skin 





Some plants that are used in healing include: 


Escoba Amarga belongs to San Lazaro, healer of skin diseases. The plant is 
used in a bath to heal skin problems. 

Obatala owns white cotton bush. Seeds help asthma. 

Alamo, sassafras, yerba mora are used to treat sorcery. 

Mustuerzo is used for kidney problems and in head cleansing. 

Sabila is used to treat vaginal inflammations. 


Plants also may be used to fight witchcraft. The plant Abre Camino 
(Trichilia havanesis) is used to remove the source of witchcraft. Petals of the 
Galan de Dia (Cestrum Diurnum) are spread throughout a house to keep 
away witchcraft. Pieces of Ruda (Ruta Chalepensis) are placed by doorways 
to protect the home. 


66 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Mercury 


The ritualistic use of the chemical mercury in Santeria and other Voudon 
religions is a common practice. Mercury, known as Azogue, is used in a 
number of magical operations. The chemical is known to ward off spirits, 
speed up spirits and attract money and love. 

In 1999, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
formed a multiagency task force to study the ritualistic use of mercury in 
various folk traditions. The task force discovered that a number of Botanicas 
sold the substance to customers in the Santeria, Palo, Voodoo and Espirit- 
ismo communities. Mercury was discovered to be placed in small capsules 
for amulets. Mercury was also used in baths and sprinkled around homes of 
practitioners.° 

Short-term exposure to mercury can affect the respiratory system and 
result in pneumonitis, severe bronchiolitis, pulmonary edema and/or death. 
Long-term exposure to small doses of mercury results in neurological 
problems. 


Articles of Comfort 


Responders assisting members of the Santeria religion will discover a num- 
ber of material artifacts used to provide protection and spiritual comfort. 
The most visible object is the Elekes, the sacred necklaces received in the first 
initiation. There are a number of these objects that practitioners may have in 
their possession. 


Idé 

The Idé is a bracelet that represents the Orisha Orula. The bracelet is com- 
posed of yellow and green beads, and represents the protection that is pro- 
vided by Orula. Orula is believed to have wrestled with the spirit of death 
known as Iku. Iku promised Orula that if she identifies her followers with 
a sign death will not take them before their time. The bracelet is the sym- 
bol that protects the wearer from death. It is traditionally worn on the left 
wrist. 


Macuto 

The Macuto is an amulet that has been prepared by a priest or priestess. The 
amulet is a small packet that is covered in colored beads and a cowrie shell. 
The amulet can be prepared to serve a variety of purposes. Some amulets will 
give their owner strength, peace or financial success. The Macuto is usually 
kept in the pocket of the practitioner. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 67 





Figure 4.11 A priestess conducts a ceremony for the Orishas. If responders arrive 
during ceremonies, it is recommended that they address the leadership if possible. 
This will assist in halting ritualistic activities in order to assist the patient. 


Responder Issues 





Responders that encounter Santeria rituals should address the leadership of 
the group and demonstrate respect and professionalism to all participants 
(Figure 4.11). 

There are a number of objects in Santeria that are considered spiritually 
empowered. Responders should avoid opening the soperas and shrines of the 
Orishas. 

Responders may encounter initiates wearing the elekes. The patient 
should be allowed to wear the necklaces as they provide a source of spiritual 
comfort to the practitioner. However, if a responder must remove the beads 
in order to give proper treatment, if possible they should ask the practitioner 
to remove the beads. 

Responders may discover lacerations on the head of initiates from some 
of the various rituals. There are many religious “secrets” in the religion of 


68 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 4.12 Responders should use caution if handling ritual objects during an 
investigation. Animal blood may be present on the tools that have been ritually 
“fed.” 


Santeria. Be advised that you may have to be tactful in inquiring about scars 
and marks acquired during rituals. 

Responders should use caution when handling artifacts, such as amulets. 
Residue of mercury may be present among these objects. If mercury is pres- 
ent, stay upwind from the area of contamination. Use a mercury spill kit if 
needed and utilize self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) if possible. 

Responders handling artifacts and or patients may discover the presence 
of animal blood from sacrificial rituals (Figure 4.12). Utilize gloves, masks 
and eye protection as needed. 

Responders who may be removing ritual objects, such as drums, should 
be advised that animal skins can be used for drum heads. Diseases may be 
present in these skins. Use protective clothing to avoid contamination. 

Some offerings include the use of guinea pepper. Practitioners may chew 
on the pepper before offering the seeds. These may cause slight irritation in 
the practitioner’s mouth. 

Syncretic religions such as Santeria have changed historically and evolved 
from their origins in Africa. In the same theme, the approaches and tactics 
used by healthcare professionals when interacting with people of various reli- 
gious faiths should change and evolve with the needs of the client culture. 


Santeria (Regla de Ocha) 69 


References 


1. 


ao 


American Religious Identification Survey 2001, The Graduate Center of the 
City University of New York, Web site at: http://www.gc.cuny.edu/faculty/ 
research_studies/aris.pdf 


. O’Brien, David M., Animal Sacrifice and Religious Freedom: Church of the 


Lukumi Babalu-Aye v. City of Hialeah, 2004, Lawrence: University of Kansas 
Press, 10. 


. Brown, David, Santeria Enthroned, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 


2003. 


. Bascom, William, Sixteen Cowries: Yoruba Divination from Africa to the New 


World, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1980. 


. Gonzalez Wippler, Migen, Santeria: The Religion, Original Publications, 1989. 
. Task Force on Ritualistic Uses of Mercury Report, United States Environmen- 


tal Protection Agency, Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, Washing- 
ton, D.C.: OSWER 9285.4-07, EPA/540-R-01-005, December 2002. 


Palo and Kongo Religions 


Assessing the Scene 


You receive a call that police are on the scene of an incident in which they 
have arrested members of a group on charges of grave robbing. Officers are 
reporting that a member of the group is covered in blood and in need of medi- 
cal attention in a residential home. Upon arriving, an officer leads you into 
the basement of the house where the police are crowded around a man sitting 
on the floor covered in blood. The walls are also covered in blood and display 
strange drawings of symbols, and the room is filled with iron pots containing 
numerous sticks. A human skeleton sits in a chair in the back of the room. 


There is very little information available to the public in the United States 
about the Kongo religions. The majority of the literature available on the 
subject is written in Spanish and is from Cuba where the religion is openly 
practiced. Because of the secretive nature of Palo Mayombe (usually referred 
to simply as Palo) and other Bakongo religious traditions, responders may 
rarely see the religious artifacts of these religions. Rites are practiced in 
secret to preserve their sacred customs and because of the controversial use 
of human remains in their practices. (The word Kongo is commonly used by 
religious historians to refer to the kingdom of the Bakongo people. The spell- 
ing is considered “traditional” as opposed to Congo, which refers to the new 
political state in the region.) 


Bantu Traditions 





Las Reglas de Congo is a term used to refer to the numerous religious tradi- 
tions of the Bantu people of Central Africa. These traditions include a num- 
ber of religious cultures that are seen in the United States. These traditions 
or “branches” are known as Ramas. Each tradition has its own unique prac- 
tices, symbols and social structures. Some of the Bantu religious traditions 
include Brilumba, Kimbisa, Corta Lima and Palo Mayombe.! Palo Mayombe 
is the Bantu religion that appears to be the most widely practiced throughout 
the United States. 


71 


72 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


In order to understand the modern day practice of Palo Mayombe, it is 
important for responders to understand the basic elements of the Central 
African Bantu religion. 


Bantu Religious Elements 


Bantu religions teach that the world is divided between that of the living 
and that of the dead. Spirits of the dead and spirits of nature are believed to 
interact with humanity, and in order to properly interact with these spirits, 
the Bantu enlist the help of the local herbalist and healer. The Bantu ritual 
specialist is known as the Nganga. Through the use of medicines, known as 
Nkisi, the specialist could solve the problems of the local community. He/she 
would use elements found in nature, such as stones, bones, dirt and water to 
communicate with the world of the dead and with nature.” 

The Bantu religions and their ritual specialists were spread throughout the 
world when many of the Bantu were driven into slavery. A large concentration 
of Bantu people (properly known as Bakongo) were taken to Cuba where their 
religions were suppressed by the colonialists. The religions started to take on 
different forms when the slaves began to incorporate European Christianity 
and the Yoruba traditions from Africa into their rites and practices. 

The Nganga of Africa was transformed from being the name of a ritual 
specialist to the name for a ritual vessel. The contemporary version of the 
Nganga is a clay or iron vessel that houses the spirits of nature and of the dead 
(Figure 5.1). The Bantu religions were brought to the United States through- 
out the mid-twentieth century. While early members of these religions were 


F 





Figure 5.1 The Nganga is the central vessel used in Palo Mayombe and other 
assorted Kongo faiths. The Nganga contains the elements that form the Nkisi (or 
sacred medicines} used by the Bantu people groups of the Kongo. 


Palo and Kongo Religions 73 


predominantly Latinos, a number of Anglo Americans have become initiated 
throughout the years. Today, the Bantu religions operate in the United States, 
although somewhat secretly. The secrets of tradition and some of the practices 
of the religions make it difficult for them to be practiced in the same open 
manner that thet are in Cuba. It is for this reason that responders may have 
difficulty in openly communicating with practitioners of Bantu religions. 


Beliefs and Practices 


The primary tradition we will examine will be Palo Mayombe, as it is the 
most evident of the Bantu religions in the United States. 

The fundamental teachings of Palo Mayombe is that the creator of the 
world is known as Nzambi, a benevolent being that has been compared by 
some practitioners to the Judeo-Christian concept of a creator god. In Kongo 
past culture, Nzambi was a benevolent creator that gave man medicines to 
help the world. These medicines were known as Minkisi.* 

According to Kongo mythology, Nzambi gave man the instruction on 
how to create sacred medicines from plants. These medicines had to be 
infused with a spiritual power in order to be functional. This spiritual power 
was attained by taking dirt from graveyards. The soil from these areas con- 
tained the spiritual energy from the dead who were buried there. 

Bantu belief teaches that the spirits of the dead (known as the Nfumbe) 
can interfere with the lives of the living (Figure 5.2). The dead can also be 
called upon to perform work for the living. The spirit of a dead human is 





Figure 5.2 Human bones are components that are traditionally used in the 
Nganga to represent the Nfumbe or spirits of the dead. The skull, known as 
Kiyumba represents the intelligence of the dead. (Courtesy of Michael Vincent, 
Orange County Sheriff’s Office Criminal Investigations, Orlando, Florida.) 


74 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


placed inside the Nganga. The spirit becomes a servant to the ritual special- 
ists who own the Nganga. 

Alongside the dead, the spirits of nature (known as Mpungo) are placed 
in the Nganga. Mpungo also are found to be identified with Catholic saints. 
Practitioners may refer to the Mpungo by one of its several different names. 
The Spanish, Yoruba, Bantu or Catholic saint name may be used when speak- 
ing of the spirits. 

Kadiempembe (also known as Lungombe) is the dark counterpart to the 
creator. Palo practitioners claim that magic can be performed with the power 
of the light (Nzambi) or the powers of darkness (Kadiempembe). Those who 
use magic for benevolent work are known as Palo Christianos, while those 
who use the adversarial powers are known as Palo Judios. Judios (or Jewish 
Palo) merely refers to the absence of Christian images and references in the 
ritual vessel. The traditional indicator that a Nganga may be used for Chris- 
tian workings is the presence of a crucifix and holy water. 

The myths and characteristics of the Mpungo dictate what responders 
will find in the Nganga. The Nganga will be decorated and filled with imple- 
ments, colors and symbols that refer to the Mpungo. Once inside the vessel, 
these items are known as the Nkisi. 

Some Palo houses use syncretism (the fusing of different religious beliefs) 
much like that found in Santeria. The saints of the Catholic Church and the 
Orishas of Santeria may be used to identify the Mpungo. 

The following are some of the most popular Mpungo of Palo Mayombe: 


Tiembla Tierra or Mama Kengue: Rules over the Earth. Associated with 
the Orisha Obatala and the Virgin de las Mercedes. The color white is 
used in the shrine to Tiembla Tierra. Represents wisdom and justice. 

Mama Chola or Choya Wengue: Rules over the river. Associated with the 
Orisha Oshun and the saint The Virgin de la Caridad del Cobre. The 
color yellow is used in her shrines alongside items associated with the 
river. Represents richness and pleasures. 

Siete Rayos or Mama Nsasi: Rules over thunder and fire. Associated with 
the Orisha Chango and Saint Barbara. 

Kobayende or Tata Nfumbe: Rules over disease and healing. Known as King 
of the Dead. Associated with the Orisha Babalu-aye and Saint Lazarus. 

Centelle Ndoki or Mariwanga: Rules over the cemeteries and owns the 
gate between life and death. Associated with the Orisha Oya and the 
Virgin de la Candelaria. 

Gurufinda: Rules over the forest and herbal magic. Associated with the 
Orisha Osain and Saint Norbert. 

Lucero: Rules over the crossroads of fate and opens doorways. Associated with 
the Orisha Eleggua and the Catholic Saint Anthony and Nino Atocha. 


Palo and Kongo Religions 75 


Kalunga or Madre De Agua: Rules over the ocean waters and fertility. 
Associated with the Orisha Yemaya and the Catholic saint Our Lady 
of Regla. 

Zarabanda: Rules over strength, work and iron. Associated with the Ori- 
sha Ogun and Saint Peter. 


There are a number of other spirits that can inhabit the Nganga. The 
Nfuri are wandering spirits, the Bakalu are ancestral spirits, and the Nkuyu 
are ancestors who are paying the debts for negative acts during their life. 
They are ghost-like beings that can haunt someone. 


Nganga: The Cauldron 


As noted above, the spirits of the dead and of nature are kept together in a 
vessel known as the Nganga. The Nganga is viewed much like a small universe 
that is composed of trees, rivers and mountains represented by dirt, water 
and tree branches. Tree branches, known as Palos, are placed in bundles of 
twenty-one into the Nganga cauldron, which is made of clay or iron. A spe- 
cial stone, known as Matari, is placed first in the pot and elements of water, 
shell, herbs and dirt are then added. The elements found in the Nganga will 
reflect the Mpungo to which the pot is dedicated. For example, a cauldron 
dedicated to a spirit of water may contain materials, such as boat oars, fish 
and fishnet. Other common elements include dirt from cemeteries, church 
grounds and jails. 

Responders may discover a small piece of bamboo or cane that is sealed 
on both ends (Figure 5.3). This is the cana brava and it is most likely filled 
with mercury. The cana brava acts as a thermometer for the cauldron. The 
mercury can keep the spirits “cool.” 


Bones 


Responders who encounter Palo Mayombe shrines may discover the pres- 
ence of animal and human bones in the Nganga. Bones play a special part in 
the building of the Nganga as they represent the ancestors and the spirits of 
the dead. The energy of these spirits resides in the bones. It is by using these 
energies that the practitioners of Palo Mayombe can interact with the spirits 
of the dead. Practitioners refer to human bones as the Nfumbe. 

The primary human bones used in the Nganga are the skull, tibia and 
femur. The skull, known as the Kiyumba, acts as the “intelligence” of the 
dead and as a conductor between the world of the dead and the world of the 
living. The skull is placed in the center of the Nganga’s components. The tibia 
and femur may be found inside the Nganga or near the vessel. These bones 
can be used as scepters when conducting rituals. These are the primary bones 


76 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 5.3 The cana brava is a piece of cane or bamboo that is filled with mer- 
cury and sealed off. Responders who are handling evidence from the Nganga 
should be cautioned in touching these objects. (Photo courtesy of Emily Owens, 
Hutchins Police Department, Hutchins, Texas.) 


that are used; however, there are a number of case examples in which addi- 
tional bones were found inside the Nganga. In some cases, the skullcap has 
been discovered being used as a “bowl” to hold various substances, such as 
herbs or water. 

There are a number of sources that Palo practitioners use to obtain 
human bones, including medical specimen companies and scientific supply 
companies. In recent years bones from these sources have frequently been 
discovered to be the skeletal remains of Chinese males. There are currently a 
number of Internet Web sites that offer human bones. There also have been 
some Palo practitioners who have obtained bones by robbing graves. 

The possession of human bones is acommon practice for members of many 
African religious traditions. The bones are kept to show honor and respect for 
the dead. However, in the United States, state laws govern the sale, possession 
and transport of human bones. Nonlaw enforcement responders who encoun- 
ter bones should contact law enforcement for assistance. Physical anthropolo- 
gists should be contacted to identify the bones. The skull (or Kiyumba) can be 
used to identify such aspects as sex, race and age of the bones. 


Sacred Spaces 


Because of its powerful nature, the Nganga is kept in a private area. The ves- 
sels of Palo Mayombe will traditionally be found in a shed or small house, 


Palo and Kongo Religions 77 





Figure 5.4 The working space of a Palero is shown. The Nganga is traditionally 
kept in a secret location as it is a very powerful artifact that houses spirits con- 
sidered dangerous and volatile. (Courtesy of Michael Vincent, Orange County 
Sheriff’s Office Criminal Investigations, Orlando, Florida.) 


called Nso Nganga. The shed can be a garage or a small building used for 
storage. Some cases have revealed the presence of the Nganga inside a bed- 
room closet (Figure 5.4). 

Responders may see a number of symbols and cryptic signs painted on the 
floors and walls near the Nganga. These symbols are known as Firma, which 
are symbols and signatures that represent religious concepts in Palo, such 
as rituals, deities and prayers (Figure 5.5). The Firma are painted in white, 
black or red colors. The symbols most commonly used are crosses, Xs, circles, 
skulls and arrows. Each symbol represents a concept that is communicated to 
the spiritual world. Palo practitioners are taught the hidden meanings behind 
these symbols through oral teachings passed on by the priesthood.* 


78 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 5.5 The Firma is a drawing that represents Bantu religious concepts, 
such as deities, rituals and the intention of practices. Responders may observe 
these images painted inside ritual spaces where Palo is practiced. 


The sacred vessels and artifacts of Palo Mayombe may be discovered 
when responding to calls. Following are a few of the most common vessels 
and artifacts that are used in the practice of Palo Mayombe. 


Lucero 

The vessel for Lucero is very similar in appearance to the artifact of Eleg- 
gua in Santeria. Lucero is usually found in the form of a cement head deco- 
rated with cowrie shells or painted facial features. Lucero may be placed on a 
terra cotta plate or in a cauldron. His vessel may contain toys, candy or goats 
(Figure 5.6). 


Siete Rayos 

The Nganga to Siete Rayos may be painted red. The vessels associated with 
Siete Rayos may contain bones from birds, stones and red roosters. The skull 
and horns of a large ram is a favored item in his Nganga. 


Zarabanda 

The vessels for Zarabanda always contain elements made of iron and are 
always placed in an iron cauldron. The vessel can contain machetes, railroad 
spikes, knives and tools. 


Mama Sholan 
Mama Sholan is typically found in a ceramic or terra cotta pot. The vessel 
may contain fishnet, boat oars, river water and honey. 


Palo and Kongo Religions 79 





Figure 5.6 Responders may discover the presence of blood and remains of ani- 
mals in the shrines of Palo practitioners. Blood is called Menga and is used as an 
offering to the deities. This is a Lucero that has been fed various birds. (Courtesy 
of Michael Vincent, Orange County Sheriff’s Office Criminal Investigations, 
Orlando, Florida.) 


Centelle Ndoki 
The vessel for Centelle Ndoki may contain cat bones and cemetery dirt 
because she rules the cemetery, the dead and creatures of the night. 


Tiembla Tierra 
The vessel for Tiembla Tierra may be colored white. The vessel is fed white 
animals and may contain snakes and bird remains. 


80 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 5.7 Francisco is a figure that represents deified African ancestors and is 
also used in shrines to represent the Mpungo Siete Rayos. 


Madre de Agua 

The vessel for Madre de Agua may contain elements related to water and the 
ocean because she rules the sea and all the riches that dwell in it. The vessel 
can contain remains from a ram and turtle. 


Francisco and Francisca 

These two figures are depicted in the form of an elderly African man and 
woman. They are used to symbolize strong deified ancestors in the reli- 
gion. The hardships of slavery are depicted in the images of these two 
figures (Figure 5.7). 


Seven Congos 
This image is depicted as a female “mammy”-type figure with seven children 
sitting around her. These images represent the seven tribes of the Congo that 
landed in Cuba. 


Group Structure 


Organized Palo groups are known as Munanso, a group of worshippers 
dedicated to a particular deity. The name of the Munanso may reflect its 
affiliation. A group, such as Munanso Siete Rayos, reflects dedication to the 
Mpungo Siete Rayos. The initiated priest in Palo is known as the Palero. Palo 
is traditionally handed down through family lineage. 

Members of the Munanso may hold a particular office in the temple. 
The Ngueyo is a practitioner who has made a pact with the Mpungo of his 


Palo and Kongo Religions 81 


godfather. The Tata Nkisi is one who has acquired knowledge of using herbs 
and magic, but has not attained the Nganga. The Tata Nganga is a leader who 
has received the Nganga and can lead a Munanso. The Tata Ndibilinongo 
not only has an Nganga, but has spiritual godchildren. The highest level of 
initiation is the Tata Luwongo who is known as the godfather of the Prenda. 
The Bakonfula acts as an assistant to the Tata of the Munanso. Also known 
as the Mayombero, the Bakonfula assists with teaching new initiates about 
the symbols, rituals and courtesies of the temple. 


Rituals and Ceremonies 


There is a specific cultural etiquette that practitioners of Palo Mayombe 
must follow while interacting with the spirits of the Nganga. The practitioner 
addresses the spirits with a salutation of Sala Maleko, Maleko Sala. 

The practitioner treats the spirits with respect, but will always hold a 
dominant role over the spirits. Some houses use a leather bullwhip (Kubula) 
to dominate the Nganga and show authority over the spirits while “whip- 
ping” them into obedience. Practitioners may burn piles of gunpowder called 
Fula to get the attention of the spirits. And traditional songs and prayers 
known as Mambos may be uttered to call upon the spirits. 


Divination 


Practitioners may use objects to interact with the spirits in the Nganga. The 
Chamalongo are four pieces of coconut that are thrown to the ground in 
front of the Nganga (Figure 5.8). The pattern in which the pieces land is 
interpreted by the practitioner as a response from the spiritual world. Cowrie 
shells, known as Encobo, are also used to interpret the will of the spirits. 

An artifact, known as the Vititi Mensu, is an animal horn used in divi- 
nation rites. The horn is filled with herbs and various materials and then 
capped off with a mirror and wax. The practitioner is trained to use the arti- 
fact to see messages from the spirits by looking into the mirror. 


Sacrifices 


Animal sacrifices in Palo Mayombe are performed using a knife called the 
Mbele. The Mbele must be received by an initiate from the Mpungo Zara- 
banda. The blood of animals is used to feed the spirits that live in the Nganga. 
Blood is known as Menga and is an essential tool in interacting with the dei- 
ties. Blood is taken from various animals offered to the Nganga, including 
chickens, goats, rams, sheep and dogs. Exotic animals may be used as well: 
snakes, spiders and even horses. 


82 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 5.8 The Chamalongos are used as a divination tool to communicate 
with the spirits inside the Nganga. The shells are thrown and the pattern in 
which they land is interpreted by the priest. 


The animal is presented to the spirit as prayers (Mambos) are offered. 
The animal is killed and the blood of the animal is poured onto the objects 
inside the Nganga. The carcass of the animal is placed inside the cauldron 
where it will remain until the practitioner feels it is necessary to remove it 
(Figure 5.9). 


Initiation 


The Palo initiation begins with a pact between god (Nsambi), the living 
(Munanso) and the dead (Nfumbe). The initiate is given a ceremonial bath 
filled with sacred herbs and liquids (Figure 5.10). 

The initiate may be taken to a cemetery to find the spirit that will work in 
the Nganga. The priest will perform divination over various graves in order 
to find a willing spirit. Rum is poured onto a grave and the priest listens for 
the sound of rumbling which signifies that the spirit inside is willing to work 
in the Nganga. Bones may be taken from the grave and placed in the pot 
alongside bits of soil. Water, animal bones, peppers and vegetables are added 
to create a new ritual vessel. Ingredients will also be taken from the priest’s 
Nganga and placed in the new pot in order to “give birth” to the Nganga. 

The initiate is blindfolded and a number of ritualistic cuts are made on 
his/her body. A razor or spur is used to cut the flesh in a number of loca- 
tions. This cutting is known as the Rayado, initiates may refer to this as being 
“scratched in.” The neck, feet, hands and chest area are cut and the blood of 


Palo and Kongo Religions 83 


oT. ares wy a] 
t 4 A = 
SSSA 





Figure 5.9 This Nganga was discovered near the scene of a double homicide. 
Although the discovery of the cauldron coincided with the discovery of the 
crime scene, the vessel was found to be unrelated to the crime. (Photo courtesy 
of Emily Owens, Hutchins Police Department, Hutchins, Texas.) 


the initiate is placed in the Nganga to bind him or her to the spirit. Gunpow- 
der, rum and powdered bone can be placed in the cuts and then the cuts are 
sealed with wax. 

A Firma of the spirit is carved into the flesh of the initiate. The initiate 
also receives a secret symbol that is known only to members of the Munanso. 


84 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 5.10 The initiate stands on this firma to make the Pacto or “pact” with 
the dead (Nfumbe). 


The tongue also may be cut. Drumming and chanting are performed to 
invoke the spirits, and Fula is burned to obtain messages from the spirits. 

The initiate receives a large strand of beads called the Collar de Bandera. 
These are worn during certain Palo ceremonies. The bead’s color reflects the 
Mpungo that the initiate serves. The strand of beads is about four feet in 
length and is worn from the left side of the body over to the right side. 

Trance possession can occur during this ceremony. The possession in 
Palo allows the initiate to see with the eyes of the spirits. This “mounting” 
of the initiate by the spirit is known as Montado. The Priest will blow cigar 
smoke behind the ears of the initiate to bring about possession. 


Herbalism 


Herbs play a very important role in Palo Mayombe practices. The herbs of the 
forest contain the energies necessary to heal and protect mankind. One of the 
most important herbal mixtures in Palo Mayombe is called Chamba, which 
is a mixture of herbs, peppers, alcohol, bone and other ingredients. Chamba 
is used to purify ritual objects and to invigorate the spirits (Figure 5.11). 

There are a number of special powders created in Palo Mayombe known 
as Mpolos. These powders are made from cemetery dirt, powdered bone, 
snake and bat skins. The branches of the silk cotton tree, known as the Ceiba, 
are used in various healing rites in Palo. 


Palo and Kongo Religions 85 





Figure 5.11 Shown are bottles of the substance Chamba, which is a liquid that 
is sprayed onto ritual vessels. The traditional Chamba recipe contains water, 
alcohol, peppers, herbs and various plants. Some recipes use powdered bone. 


Some of the common herbs used in the Kongo traditions include: 


Mecheiso: Ocimum basilicum (basil) 

Dioke: Ambrosia artemisiiflora, Carbonero 

Naona: Cassia biflora, Carbonero 

Espanta Muerto: Petiveria alliacea (anamu) 

Yunkagua: Guaiacum officinalis (lignum vitae tree) 

Cereke: Ficus nitida (Indian laurel; bay laurel) 

Inkita: Amyris Balsamifera, Palo Cuaba (West Indian Rosewood) 


Articles of Comfort 


Initiates may have received beaded necklaces known as Collar de Bandera 
(see section on Initiation above). These necklaces are nearly four-feet long and 
contain beads, shells and chain. They are worn over the left shoulder during 
ceremonies. 

Charms known as Makutos or Resguardos are created by Paleros. These 
charms may be found in the form of bones wrapped in cloth. The color of the 
cloth may reflect the Mpungo to which the charm is dedicated. 

The Mpaka is an artifact that is made from an animal horn. The horn 
includes ingredients found in the Nganga and is sealed with wax. The horn 
may be used to transport the fundamental materials used in the Nganga. 


86 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


The Ceiba tree, which is a silk cotton tree, is considered sacred in the reli- 
gion of Palo Mayombe. The Ceiba contains spirits of the dead. The branches 
of the Ceiba are used in healing medicines. 


Healing and Sickness 


The branches of various trees contain healing properties. To protect a child 
from evil, a branch from the Iroko tree is wrapped in red ribbon and hung 
above the crib. 

A piece of jet (a form of fossilized wood), known as Azabache, is worn on 
a necklace or bracelet to protect against the evil eye. 

Baths also are used to heal and the bath water is filled with colognes, 
herbs, flowers and trees branches. 

Rogación de Cabeza is a head cleanser used to remove negative energies 
and vibrations. 


Responder Issues 





When encountering a group practicing its religious ceremonies, realize that 
it may be awkward for the group to be seen in ritual. Some members of the 
group may not be public about their faith or they may have encountered nega- 
tive reactions to their faith in the past. Respond in a kind and professional 
manner. 

Allow the patient to carry any necessary objects of protection that may 
give him or her comfort: amulets, jewelry, talismans, gemstones or any other 
items that may be of comfort to the patient. 

Responders should use caution when handling artifacts, such as amu- 
lets. Residue of mercury may be present among these objects. If mercury is 
present, stay upwind from the area of contamination. Use a mercury spill kit 
if needed and utilize self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA), if possible 
(Figure 5.12). 

Responders may discover lacerations on the body of initiates from some 
of the various rituals. There are many religious “secrets” in the religion of 
Palo Mayombe. Be advised that you may have to be tactful in inquiring 
about scars and marks acquired during rituals. Also be advised that mate- 
rials, such as human bone and gunpowder, may be placed in these cuts. 

Responders handling artifacts and/or patients may discover the presence 
of animal blood from sacrificial rituals. Utilize gloves, masks and eye protec- 
tion as needed. 

If responders discover an Nganga, they should contact law enforcement, 
as the Nganga may contain human remains. The origins of these remains 
should be analyzed by a local medical examiner. Remains may have been 


Palo and Kongo Religions 87 





Figure 5.12 Responders should be aware that the use of mercury in a ritualistic 
vessel is quite common in Palo Mayombe. (Courtesy of Michael Vincent, Orange 
County Sheriff’s Office Criminal Investigations, Orlando, Florida.) 


attained byillegal means, suchas illegal trafficking or grave robbing. Although 
it is unlikely, the remains could be from a homicide. Some animal bones can 
easily be mistaken as human bones. This determination becomes especially 
difficult when encountering fragmented bones. Agencies should contact a 
forensic anthropologist for determination of the origin of the bones. 

Some practitioners will spew Chamba onto the Nganga using their mouth. 
Responders may discover burns inside the mouth due to the use of peppers in 
the liquid. Patients may also become ill if they ingest the Chamba. 


References 


1. Arostequi, Natalia Bolivar, Ta Makuende Yaya y las reglas de palo monte: May- 
ombe, brillumba, kimbisa, shamalongo, Cuba, Ediciones UNION, Unión de 
Escritores y Artistas de Cuba, 1993. 

2. McGaffey, Wyatt, Astonishment and Power: The Eyes of Understanding Kongo 
Minkisi, Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Institution, 1993. 

3. Bockie, Simon, Death and the Invisible Powers: The World of Kongo Belief, 
Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1993. 

4. Thompson, Robert Ferris, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art 
and Philosophy, New York, Vintage, 1984. 


Voodoo 


Assessing the Scene 


You receive a call to respond to a residence in which a 50-year-old Haitian 
female is having seizures. As you walk through the house to get to the patient, 
you notice a number of colorful statues and candles in the rooms. Walls are 
covered with images of Catholic saints while plants and various gourds hang 
from the ceilings. The patient is sitting on the floor that is inscribed with chalk 
circles and lines. A group of men and women dressed in white clothing stand 
against one of the walls where colored flags hang. 


With the stigma that Hollywood has placed on the practice of Voodoo, the 
responder may have a sense of culture shock when encountering authentic 
Voodoo rituals. The word Voodoo itself invokes images of zombies, black 
magic and human sacrifice. The reality of Voodoo is something all together 
different. The real world of Voodoo is a complex religion that focuses on the 
spirits of ancestors as well as the spirits of nature that rule this world. Ances- 
tor reverence of the practice can be traced back to Africa where many Afri- 
cans still seek guidance and protection from their departed kin. The belief 
system of Voodoo serves as an old friend to those Haitian Americans who 
have come to live in America. Practiced still in the basements of Brooklyn 
and the kitchens of Miami, the Voodoo religion and its gods act as a comfort 
to Haitians who experience a totally new way of life in America. 


Beliefs and Practices 





The religion of Voodoo comes from Benin, formerly known as Dahomey, 
West Africa. The African beliefs and gods were challenged by the colonial- 
ists who took over the island of Hispaniola and imported slaves from this 
continent. The colonialists sought to destroy the African identity by forcing 
religious practices of Catholicism onto the Africans. To assimilate, the Afri- 
can people began to mix the European’s view of religion with the practices 
of African traditional religion. The practices of several African groups, such 
as the Yoruba, Congo, Fon and Senegalese, evolved into Voodoo, which is a 
West African word that means “spirit.” 


89 


90 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


The island of Hispaniola is composed of Haiti on the western third of 
the island and the Dominican Republic on the east. Voodoo was suppressed 
by colonialists in areas such as Haiti. However, today, Voodoo is the major 
religion of that country. While slavery in America sought to destroy Voodoo 
practices, it has managed to survive the onslaught of slavery and still exists 
in homes and temples across the United States. 

Voodoo practitioners believe in a creator deity known as Gran Met Bon- 
dye. Gran Met means Great Master and Bondye comes from Bon Dieu, which 
means Good God. 

The Voodoo belief system primarily focuses on the reverence of deities 
created by Bondye, known as Loas. The Loas are different manifestations of 
the creator deity and are often referred to as Mysteries or Angels. Adherents 
believe that the Loas come from a variety of African countries and ethnic 
groups. Because of this, the rituals and characteristics of these deities will 
differ. Loas are typically organized into groups according to their location 
of origin and their personality. These groups are called Nations. Some of 
the nations are the Petro, Rada, Congo and Nago. These spirits live in a city 
beneath the sea known as Ginen. They must be summoned into this world in 
order to manifest (appear or be revealed”). The Loas are also organized into 
“families.” Some of the families, such as the Ogou, Ezili and Gede, have spir- 
its that are known by the family name and the individual spirit name, such 
as Ezili Freda and Ezili Danto (Figure 6.1).! 


Rada 


The Loas that come from the holy city Arada of the Dahomey region of Africa 
are called Rada. Rada Loas are considered “cool” by followers. These spirits have 
friendly characteristics. The following spirits are part of the Rada pantheon: 


Legba 

Legba is the owner of the Crossroads and is called upon first in ceremonies 
to open the doorway to the spiritual world. Sometimes called Papa Legba, 
he is syncretized with Saint Peter, who guards the keys to heaven, and Saint 
Lazarus. His favorite color is red. 


Marasa 

These Loas are “sacred” twin spirits that appear in Rada and Petro rituals. 
The twins may be invoked following Legba in rituals. They may have other 
spirit offspring known as Marasa Dosu, which means “boy.” The sacrifices are 
in the form of foods served in a terra cotta bowl called the Mange-Marasa. 
The bowl looks like three small bowls connected together. The Marasa are 
depicted as Saint Cosmo and Saint Damien. 


Voodoo 91 





Figure 6.1 This celebratory shrine contains many objects representing the 
deities of Haitian Voodoo. (Courtesy of Sallie Ann Glassman and Jeffrey 
Ehrenreich.) 


Loko 

Loko is known as the first priest (Houngan) and he guards the sanctuary 
(Peristyle). Loco is the Loa of healing with herbs. Loko is associated with 
the images of Saint Joseph and the archangel Gabriel. Offerings to Loco are 
placed in straw bags. 


Ayizan 

Ayizan is the wife of Legba and is depicted as an old woman with an apron 
that has deep pockets. She represents the marketplace and is sometimes 
referred to as the “mother of all initiates.” Ayizan is represented by mounds 
of dirt surrounded by fringes of palm fronds. 


92 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Sobo 

Sobo is the Loa of strength. He also rules over thunder and rain. Sobo acts as 
the judge of the temple and is depicted as a handsome soldier. He is symbol- 
ized by an emblem of lightning. 


Agassou 

The myth of Agassou tells of his birth from a princess and leopard. Agassou 
is referred to as the king of the Leopard Society of West Africa, a men’s tribal 
society. He guards the traditions of Dahomey. Some Voodoo historians say 
that Agassou was the first human to develop into a Loa. 


La Sirene 

La Sirene is a fish-like being that lives and rules over the oceans. Married 
to the Loa Agwe, she is syncretized with La Diosa del Mar, and is repre- 
sented by mirrors, combs, a small trumpet, pearls, perfume and items from 
the ocean. 


Azaka 

Azaka is referred to as the Country Cousin. He is a man from the coun- 
try who represents agriculture, and is depicted as wearing the clothes of a 
farmer, such as denim pants and carrying a straw bag. Azaka is syncretized 
with Saint Isidore. His favorite colors are blue, red and green. He is repre- 
sented by his straw sack and a tobacco pipe. 


Damballah Wedo 

Damballah Wedo is the Loa of goodness. In the Fon language, Damballah is 
called Dan, which refers to the royal serpent of Dahomey. Dan is the symbol of 
the origins of the kingdom of Dahomey and he is represented by a serpent. Dam- 
ballah is syncretized with Saint Patrick. Symbolized by a snake and a rainbow, 
his favorite color is white, and his offerings include eggs, milk and champagne. 


Ayida Wedo 

Ayida Wedo is the Loa of wealth and happiness. She is represented by a ser- 
pent and a rainbow. Ayida Wedo is syncretized with Our Lady of Immacu- 
late Conception. She is the wife of Damballah and her favorite colors are blue 
and white. 


Ezili Freda 

Also known as Ezili Maitresse, Ezili Freda is the Loa of love and luxury. She is 
represented by a heart and is syncretized with the Virgin Mary. Ezili is the wife 
of Legba and her favorite colors are blue and pink. She is symbolized by a heart 
and a mirror and is given offerings of sweet desserts, perfumes and flowers. 


Voodoo 93 


Ogou Group 

The Ogous are powerful warriors. Ogou (which stands for justice) is the Loa 
of blacksmiths and is symbolized by a sword stuck in the ground. An Ogou 
is also represented by an iron rod stuck in the fire. There are several manifes- 
tations of Ogous, and they are syncretized with Saint James the Greater. An 
Ogou’s favorite color is red. 


Agwe 

Agwe is the Loa of the ocean. He is the patron of sailors and fishermen and 
is represented by a boat. Agwe is syncretized with Saint Ulrich. His offerings 
are placed on small boats and his favorite colors are white, green and pink. 


Petro 


The Loas that come from the colony of Saint Domingue are known as Petro 
Loa. The Petros take their name from a man called Don Pedro who lived in 
the 1700s. Don Pedro promoted several distinct dances and ceremonies. The 
Petro Loas are known as “fiery” and sometimes malevolent spirits. The Petro 
spirits may be used in sorcery and can be summoned with gunpowder and 
the cracking of bullwhips. 

Some of the Petro spirits are discussed below. 


Simbi 

Simbi are a group of ancestral spirits. These spirits live in the water that sepa- 
rates the land of the living and the land of the dead. The Loa of Clairvoyance, 
Simbi is represented by a pond of water and is syncretized with the Magi that 
visited Christ. Simbi’s favorite colors are black and grey and they are repre- 
sented by a pond and slim snakes. 


Kalfu (Carrefour) 
Kalfu is the Petro Loa of Legba. Kalfu allows bad luck and evil to enter the 
world through the crossroads. His symbol is the moon and he may be used 
in malevolent magic. 


Gran Bwa 

Gran Bwa is creole for Great Tree. Gran Bwa is the protector of wildlife. He is 
the lord over the forest and jungle and assists in healing and initiation. He is 
represented by a tree with a cloth wrapped around it. Gran Bwa presides over 
the ritual of the grinding of herbs known as Pile Fey. 


94 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Ezili Danto (Erzulie Dantor) 

Also known as Ezili of the Red Eyes, Ezili Danto is the wife of Ti-Jean Petro 
and Simbi Makaya. She is syncretized with Mater Salvatoris or Our Lady of 
Chestochowa, sometimes known as the African Saint Barbara. She protects 
single mothers and children. Her images depict her holding her child named 
Anais. Scars on her face are from her rivalry with Ezili Freda. She is symbol- 
ized by a dagger and bowls of blood. 


Marinette-Bwa-Chech 

Marinette is the principal female Loa of the Petro pantheon. She is a wife to 
Ti-Jean Petro and is represented by a screeching owl. She is a vicious spirit that 
is syncretized with Anima Sola and can free someone from or take them into 
bondage. Her colors are black and blood red. Marinette is believed to be the 
Mambo who sacrificed the black pig that started the first Haitian revolution. 


Ti-Jean Petro 

Ti-Jean Petro is a spirit that roams through the bush. He is depicted as a 
dwarf with one foot. This spirit protects sorcerers. He is the son of Erzulie 
Dantor (Ezili Danto) as well as her lover. 


Simbi 

These are the Simbi that are also followed in the Rada pantheon of Loa. These 
Simbi are a family of serpent Loa from the Kongo region. They include Loa, 
such as Simbi Andezo, Simbi Makaya, Simbi Dlo an Gran Simbi. They are 
utilized in Voodoo secret societies much like in the Sanpwel secret society. 


Gede 

The Gede family is a group of Loa that rule over the cemeteries. The Gede are 
symbolized by a cross that represents the “crossroads.” These Loa have dis- 
tinguishing characteristics in ritual, dance and sacrifices. The Gede family of 
spirits include spirits, such as Gede Nibo, Gede Plumaj, Gede Ti Mails and 
Gede Zaranye. The Gede are led by the Baron spirits of the dead. Initiates that 
become possessed by the Gede are characterized by a nasal tone of voice and 
the appearance of a dead man. The Gede use colors of black, purple and white. 


Baron Samedi 

Baron Samedi is the master over the cemeteries and is depicted dressed in 
black clothes with a black hat and dark glasses. He has a skull for a face and 
is represented on altars by phallic symbols. The Haitian dictator Papa Doc 
(Francois) Duvalier dressed as Baron Samedi in most of his public appear- 
ances. Baron Samedi’s other manifestations include Baron La Croix, Baron 
Cimitere and Baron Criminel. His colors are black and purple. 


Voodoo 95 


Maman Brigette 

Maman Brigette is the wife of Baron Samedi. Brigette is the mother of all 
spirits who enter this world. The graveyard is considered her “womb.” She is 
the female guardian of graves and is syncretized with Saint Bridget. 


Spiritual Bodies and Guardians 
Voodoo belief teaches that human beings have two distinct spiritual bodies. 
The first is known as the Ti-Bon-Anj (Ti-Bon-Ange), which means the “little 
good angel.” This is the consciousness. The Ti-Bon-Anj leaves the body dur- 
ing sleep or in trance possession. The second spiritual body is known as the 
Gros-Bon-Anj, which means the “Big good angel.” This body is the “psyche” 
of the individual and is part of the divine in man. The Gros-Bon-Anj keeps 
humans alive. 

Voodoo teaches that everyone has a Loa that guards him or her. The Met 
Tet means “the master of the head.” This is similar to a guardian angel. The 
Loa may reveal themselves through dreams or through possessing the indi- 
vidual. The priest or priestess may identify the Loa during the Kanzo ritual. 


Group Structure 


The hierarchy of practitioners in Voodoo ranges from the brief associate to 
the full-time priest or priestess. There are those practitioners who have not 
been initiated, but attend ceremonies and go to the priesthood for wisdom. 
These practitioners are known as Vodouisant. An uninitiated practitioner 
who attends ceremonies and is preparing for initiation is known as the 
Hounsi, which means “bride of the spirit.” 

The first stage of initiation is known as the Hounsi Kanzo. Initiates 
become “married” to a spirit. The second stage is known as As Si Pwen or 
Sur Point. This means the initiate is serving one particular Loa. The initiate 
is permitted to use the Asson, which is the sacred rattle used to invoke the 
Loa. The initiate may lead prayers and songs in the temple and, at this level, 
may initiate others into this level of initiation. Also, initiates at this stage are 
taught how to care for the Loa. 

The third and final stage of initiation is called Asogwe. Initiates at this 
point have become priests and priestesses of the Voodoo faith and can con- 
firm initiations of all stages on other initiates. The priestess in Voodoo is 
known as the Mambo and the priest is known as the Houngan (Figure 6.2). 
Initiates may refer to this clergy as Mama or Papa. The priest and priestess 
may oversee a group of believers known as a Society. This is a group that 
meets at various times for worship and ritual. 

There are also a number of “specialized” offices in the Voodoo society, 
including choir director, animal keeper and others. Some types of priests 


96 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 6.2 The priest (Houngan) and the priestess (Mambo) perform sacred 
baths using herbs and water. (Photo courtesy of Sallie Ann Glassman and Jeffrey 
Ehrenreich.) 


have a special title according to their specialty. The Bokor is a priest who 
works with the spirits of the dead. Some practitioners use the term “left 
hand” to describe the malevolent work that a Bokor can perform. 

There are also a number of secret societies that exist in Haitian Voodoo. 
These societies may worship a particular deity or follow a particular reli- 
gious tradition. 


Ritual Tools? 


Asson 

The Asson is a rattle similar to a maraca and is usually carried by those who 
have been initiated into a priest or priestess position of leadership. This rattle 
is usually made from a large calabash. It is sometimes filled and covered with 


Voodoo 97 





Figure 6.3 The priestess, known as the Mambo, takes the rattle called an Asson. 
Use of the Asson is restricted to initiated clergy in the religion. (Photo courtesy 
of Sallie Ann Glassman and Jeffrey Ehrenreich.) 


snake vertebrae or glass beads. The rattler may be used to strike the Veve 
signatures of the spirits (Figure 6.3). 


Bottle 

Bottles covered in sequins, beads and fabric are used in many rituals. The 
bottles are decorated in colors representing the Loa and also may be deco- 
rated with an image ofa saint. Bottles are used to honor the Loa. Some may 
hold offerings while some bottles that are decorated with doll heads may be 
used in divination rites. 


Chromolithograph 
Chromolithographs are images of the Loa represented in Catholic saint form. 


Flags 

Multicolored flags known as Drapo may be found during a search or obser- 
vation of a residence in which Voodoo is practiced. Flags announce the spir- 
its that will attend a ceremony. Voudon flags are usually made of fine cloth 
with sequined images of the spirits sewn into them. Flags may be kept on the 
Pe (or central pole of the temple) to give them power. 


Govi 

A spirit can be called through a vessel of water using a white sheet of cloth. It is 
then placed inside a jar called a Govi, which is used to call down the Loa. These 
jars are found in the temple and may be decorated with symbols of the Loa. 


98 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Packets 

The Packet comes from the Congo region. The Packet is a bag that contains 
bones, herbs, stones and other ingredients. The bag, usually decorated with 
satin cloth and sequins, may have one stem sticking out of it. This is a male 
packet. Female packets will have two arms rounded pointing down. The 
packet is found in the temple and is used to “heat up” the Loa for ceremonies. 
The packet is also known as a Wanga. 


Swords 

Swords are used in Voudoo rituals as symbols of the iron spirit Ogou. There 
is a ritual procession of the sword known as the Sword of La Place. The La 
Place is the sword bearer who helps begin the rituals of Voodoo. 


Ogan 
The Ogan is a cowbell-type instrument without a clapper. It is struck during 
ceremonies to summon the spirits. 


The Triangle 
An iron triangle that is a musical instrument is used in rituals as well. When 
it is struck, it opens spiritual doorways. 


Conch Shell 


The conch shell is blown like a trumpet to call the Loa of the ocean, Agwe. 


Zins 
Zins are three-legged pots. They are filled with oil and set on fire. The fire from 
the pots is used to warm the Loas and increase their power (Figure 6.4). 


Drums 

Drums are a core piece of equipment in a Voudon ceremony. The rhythms 
that are played on them call the spirits into the ceremony. The creation and 
preparation of the drums is a very developed ceremony and they are con- 
sidered “alive.” The drums are broken into different categories, according to 
the type of spirit being called. The three types of drums are Rada, Petro and 
Congo. Each drum has its own particular style of play and each has its own 
physical characteristics. 

The three drums are described in detail below. 


Rada drums are three in a set. Rada drums will typically have small pegs 
that stick out the sides of the top of the drum. 

Petro drums come in sets of two with one drum larger than the other. The 
Petro do not contain pegs. 

Congo drums usually come in sets of three. 


Voodoo 99 





Figure 6.4 The three-legged pot known as the Zin is filled with oil and burnt 
as a lamp. The pot is used to “warm” the Loa. (Courtesy of Michael Vincent, 
Orange County Sheriff’s Office Criminal Investigations, Orlando, Florida.) 


Drums are treated as living beings and are given power and even fed 
sacrificed animals. 


Ceremonies 





Voodoo ceremonies are referred to as “services.” The service is performed to 
contact the Loa. Practices and artifacts are used to “heat things up” (Echofe) 
to summon the Loa. Offerings of food, animals and songs are presented 
in hopes that the Loa will come to the ceremony. The traditional Voodoo 
ceremony has several components that must occur before the Loa appear 
to the temple. The two main parts of the service are the procession of the 


100 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 6.5 A mural of a traditional Voodoo ceremony. 


flags, drums and sacred ritual tools to the temple, and the invocations of Loa 
(Figure 6.5). 


Entrance 


The ceremony begins with the parade of the Houmphors flags. These flags 
are decorated with the symbols of the Loa. The Houmphors drums are then 
greeted. The center of the temple is entered and the four points of North, 
South, East and West are recognized. The Loa are called upon as well as the 
Catholic saints. Drumming and dancing begins to call the Loa. The Veve 
(religious symbols for the Loa) are drawn in cornmeal and powders on the 
ground to represent the Loa that are manifesting. The rituals begin with a 
prayer to Legba to open the gates to the spiritual world. 


The Priye Ginen 

The Priye Ginen or Prayer of Africa is used to open Voodoo services. The 
prayer is sung in French, Creole and African languages. The prayer creates 
sacred space for the ritual. 


Manje Loa: The Sacrifice 

The Loa are believed to eat as human beings do. The second part of the ser- 
vice is known as Manje Loa, this is the ritual feeding of the animals. Plates 
of food and animals to be sacrificed are left at the Poteau Mitan. The animals 
are dressed in colors of the Loa. The person in charge of the sacrifice (Com- 
manditaire) usually wears a red cloth on his or her head. He/she eats some of 
the food on the plates and feeds the animals some of the food. If the animals 


Voodoo 101 


eat the food, this means that animal has accepted the sacrifice. The animal 
is then rubbed with sacred herbs and killed. The person who kills it drinks 
some of the animal’s blood and then carries it to the four points of the ritual 
area. Devotees may rub the animal’s blood on their foreheads in the shape of 
crosses. The animals are then taken outside to be cooked. 

The Loas have specific foods that they prefer. Some of the food offered to 
the Loas include: 


Legba: cassavas, rice, green bananas, smoked foods, molted roosters 
Azaka: corn, breads, unrefined sugar, brandy 
Gede Family: black goats and black roosters 
Baron Samdi: black goats, black hens 
Dambala: eggs, rice, white hens 

Ayida Wedo: white hens, rice, milk 

Ezili: rice, chickens 

Ezili Danto: fried pork 

Ogou Feray: red roosters, bulls 

Agwe: white sheep, hens, champagne 

Simbi: black animals, turkeys, hens 


Rites of Passage 


There is a ceremony known as the Leve nom in which the initiate receives the 
name of an ancestor for protection. The ritual of Garde may be performed 
after the Leve nom. The Garde is a ritual of the cutting into the skin of the 
practitioner. The cut is a symbol that is used to identify members of the tem- 
ple. Dried herbs may be rubbed into the cut to give protection to the initiate 
and then he/she gives offerings in exchange for the protection of the deity. 

A ritual called Lave tet is a ritualistic washing of the head, which makes 
trance possession easier on the initiate. Later an initiate may receive a 
“refreshing” of the head called Rafraichi tete to widen the path for the spirit 
to work inside the initiate. 

To become an initiated priest or priestess, a ceremony is performed 
called Haussement or the “lifting” of the initiate. The ritual is a lifting of the 
devotee in a chair three times and an oath is presented in which the initiate 
swears allegiance to the Loa. 


Spirit Possession 


Possession is a normative practice that temples observe. The initiate is 
“mounted” as in Santeria by the Loa. The initiate actually becomes possessed 
by the Loa and takes on the characteristics of the Loa. For example, those 
possessed by the Loa Dambala may act like a snake. Possession by Ogou will 


102 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


usually make the initiate wield a sword. Devotees who are possessed or “rid- 
den” by the Gede Loa will wear sunglasses, a hat and will be given strong 
drinks like rum. The possession by the Gede spirits is usually marked by the 
initiate cursing and acting sexually promiscuous. The Loa will often speak 
through the possessed. 


Initiation 


The initiated is called the Ounsi. The ritual to becoming Ounsi takes one to 
two weeks. The initiate is dressed in white and is taught about the Loa and how 
to function in the temple. He or she is then presented to the temple. If the initi- 
ate becomes possessed, it is a sign that the initiate is connected to the Loa. 


Marriage 


Initiates can be married to the Loa in a ceremony. This is to give the initiate 
additional power from the Loa. The initiate is married in a traditional-type 
marriage ceremony where the initiate signs a marriage certificate to the Loa. 


Zombies 





The concept of Zombies in Haitian Voodoo is found in two forms. The first 
is through a magical being known as an “astral zombie,” which is a captured 
soul that has no body. 

The second concept of the zombie is probably the closest to the Holly- 
wood image of the living dead. The zombie is a person who is being punished 
by a Houngan (first priest) or a Bokor (priest who works with the dead). The 
priest uses a process that involves using chemicals and derivatives from ani- 
mals, such as the puffer fish and tree frogs. The chemicals are incorporated 
with a series of rituals that give the substances “magical essence.” The pow- 
ders used to create the zombie-like state have been compared to a form of 
anesthesia in which the victim’s heart rate may drop drastically. The threat 
of becoming a zombie may be used as a punishment in some Voudon houses. 
Responders who are dealing with patients with this fear need to recognize 
this concern in the patient. 


Sacred Days 





The sacred days used by the Catholic Church are honored by the liturgical 
calendar of Voodoo practitioners. 


Voodoo 103 


Bains De Chance: “luck baths” on Christmas; from December 24 to Janu- 
ary 6, herbs are crushed and the creation of sacred baths using them 
takes place during the Pile Fey. 

January 6: Epiphany 

July 16: Our Lady of Mt. Carmel is celebrated in honor of Ezili 

July 25: St. James, Ogou 

July 26: St. Anne, mother of Ezili 

November 2: Fet Ghede, all souls day; go to cemetery, give offerings 


Sacred Spaces 





Voodoo temples throughout the United States appear to exist in two forms. 
The first being a traditional temple that is not only open to the public, but is 
also very public in the eye of the media and the local community. The sec- 
ond type of temple is usually hidden from the public view and may exist in 
the basements and storage buildings of Voodoo practitioners. If responders 
encounter a temple, there are a few common structural aspects the respond- 
ers should be aware of that are used in the temple. 

The Voodoo temple is called the Houmfort. The main ritual area in which 
the majority of ceremonies occur is called the Peristyle, which is usually dec- 
orated with drawings of the saints, hanging calabashes (hard-shelled gourds) 
and items representing the Loas. There is usually an area that contains a fire 
pit wherein resides an iron bar that represents the spirit of iron. In the center 
of the Peristyle is a pole called the Poteau Mitan. This is a French word mean- 
ing “pole in the middle.” It used by the Loa to climb down from the heavens 
and the pole represents the center of the universe. It is usually decorated with 
paintings of the serpents Danbhalah and Aida Wedo. 

One of the most common items found in the Voodoo ceremony is the 
Veve. This image originally came from the Congo region. The Congo reli- 
gions utilize drawings and symbols in much of their ceremonies and rites. 
This is an image that is universally recognized as the symbol of a particular 
Loa. The symbol is drawn on the ground with cornmeal, coffee, powdered 
brick or chalk. His figure is usually placed where a spirit is to manifest with 
food, sometimes being left on the drawings for the spirit. The Veve is a door- 
way for the Loa to appear through. 

There is also an altar called the Pe. The Pe is usually square shaped and 
holds several personal ritual objects that are considered sacred to the mem- 
bers of the temple. This may even include a snake representing Danbhala, the 
serpent god. 

The temple also contains chambers known as Kay Miste or Huts of the 
Mysteries, which are reserved for worship of a single Loa. These chambers 
may contain images and tools used by the particular Loa. 


104 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Responders may also encounter altars and shrines containing a number 
of items in the homes of practitioners. The personal altar is called a Roga- 
toire, which usually contains a picture of the saint that corresponds with 
their personal Loa. Candles, crosses and other Voudon icons may be on this 
altar. Food may be left on the altar for the Loa as well. 

Many of the items frequently found on a traditional Voodoo altar include: 


Lithographs or prints of Catholic saints 
Ceramic or terra cotta pots 

Drinking glass or shot glass of rum or wine 
Bottles of rum, champagne 

Statues 


Objects representing the Loa also are found on the altar. Each Loa has 
several artifacts that reflect the personality of each individual Loa. 


Azaka is represented by a straw bag and tobacco pipe. The bag, known as 
the Alfo, is worn much like a purse. The items of Azaka reflect his per- 
sonality as a Haitian farmer. 

Agwe is represented by a wooden boat that hangs from the ceiling. 

The Ogou Loa may be represented by a sword and objects of iron. 

La Siren may be represented by images of mermaids and seashells. She 
may also be represented by combs and mirrors. 

Legba may be represented by a wooden crutch and tobacco pipes. 

Ezili Danto is represented by a knife, which is frequently placed inside 
a bowl. 

The Baron Loa may be represented by a black top hat. 

The Gede family of spirits is represented by a coffin, sunglasses and a cross. 
Images of skulls may also be used for Gede. 

Ezili Freda may be represented by jewelry, perfume and lace. 


Western culture also contributes to the altars and shrines of the Voodoo 
practitioner. Toy action figures and photographs of American pop icons may 
be placed there. To outsiders the altars may appear strange and unorganized, 
but to the creator and owner of the altar, the elements all have significance. 
The strength of the god Legba may be symbolized with a Batman action fig- 
ure while the female gender of the spirit Ezili may be represented by a Barbie 
doll. Significance is in the eye of the beholder. 


Voodoo 105 


Health and Sickness 





The Loa can inflict punishment on those who they are disciplining. If an 
initiate is neglecting the Loa or is being careless, the Loa can punish through 
violent trance possession. 

A phenomenon, known as a Baka, can affect a client. The Baka is an evil 
spirit that is sent to do harm to someone. 

Since we are looking specifically at Haitian Voodoo, it is important as 
well to look at the Haitian culture, which teaches that sickness can come 
from one of two sources. Maladi Pei is a term to describe “country illnesses” 
that come on naturally. Maladi Bon Die refers to an illness of a spiritual 
nature. These “diseases of the Lord” must be approached holistically through 
physical and spiritual means. The concept of “hot” and “cold” blood is a con- 
dition believed to affect the patient’s health. 

There are several Haitian folk sicknesses or culture-bound sicknesses. 
Some of the Haitian culture-bound sicknesses include: 


Pedisyon (perdition): Woman thought to be pregnant, but blood flows to 
menstrual blood and pregnancy is paused. 

Mal Dyok (Maldjok) is the evil eye; caused by envy. 

Seziman is fright caused by stress. 

Giyon is bad luck caused by someone directing bad vibrations toward 
an initiate. 


Some illnesses specific to the Voodoo culture include: 


A sickness may be a result of the Loa feeling neglected. The initiate may 
have disregarded giving offerings to his/her personal Loa. Illness is a 
way to get the attention of the initiate. 

Anvwa Mo means “sending the dead.” An enemy may send the dead to 
attack a client. The spirit of the dead, known as the Mo, attaches itself 
to the victim. The Baron of the Ghede is called to tell the priest about 
the dead. The client is placed on a mat made from leaves and the Baron 
is given offerings of rum, candles and wood. 

The Ti-Bon-Ange (Ti-Bon-Anj; little good angel) can be captured by 
sorcery.° 


Healing techniques can include baths, massages and potions or the 
patient may be encouraged to spend time in the temple. One ritual technique 
involves placing the protection of a particular Loa over an individual. The 
Garde is a ceremonial act in which a cut is made into the arm of the patient 
and then rubbed with various herbs. 


106 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


At the time of death, the Ti-Bon-Ange is believed to travel to the world of 
the Invisibles. After a year and a day the spirit returns to humanity. The spirit 
is brought back in a ceremony known as Return of the Dead from the Water, 
and is then placed in the Govi jar. 

Some patients may have trouble obtaining help from local Voudon clergy 
(Houngan and Mambo) because of lack of funds. Some Voudon clergy charge 
large fees to perform healing rituals. However, once clergy is secured for heal- 
ing work, the healer may use divination to determine the source of sickness. 

There are several other offices of folk healers in the Haitian and Haitian 
Voodoo communities, including herbalists known as Docte Fey, midwives 
known as Matrons and bone setters known as Docte Zo. 


Other Traditions of Voodoo 





Responders may encounter practitioners of other traditions of Voodoo. A 
patient that simply uses the term Voodoo when describing their personal reli- 
gious practices does not necessarily mean that they are describing traditional 
Haitian Voodoo. 


Dominican Voodoo (21 Divisiones) 


The Dominican Republic shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti. Voodoo 
from the Dominican Republic has a different “flavor” to its beliefs and prac- 
tices. With many similar aspects, such as the use of the term Loa, Dominican 
Voodoo practitioners refer to a creator named Papa Bon Dye and the Loa as 
the 21 Divisiones. Dominican Voodoo includes some Loa that are distinctive 
from the Dominican geographical region, such as Anaisa Pye and Candelo 
Cedife. 


Dahomean or West African Voodoo 


West African Voodoo relies on the deities and practices of Voodoo before the 
religion traveled to areas such as Haiti. The rituals and practices are said by 
practitioners to be the oldest examples of the Voudon religion in the world. 
The Loas are referred to as Spirits. Some levels of initiation in West African 
Voodoo can be attained only through birthright and inheritance. 


New Orleans Voodoo 


New Orleans Voodoo is an interesting phenomenon. Its tradition is per- 
haps the most accessible to the general public. Based on personal research 
and academic texts, the tradition of New Orleans Voodoo appears to have 


Voodoo 107 





Figure 6.6 An altar dedicated to those lost in the tragedy of Hurricane Katrina. 
(Photo courtesy of Sallie Ann Glassman and Jeffrey Ehrenreich.) 


two “faces.” There is an unstructured collective group of practices that con- 
tains commercialized icons, such as voodoo dolls, zombie images and snake 
worship items. This tradition does not appear to be typically embraced as 
a serious practice by practitioners. However, there is a second tradition of 
New Orleans Voodoo that is a sophisticated system that uses the practices 
of Haitian Voodoo, Southern folk magic and Spiritism. As one practitioner 
explains, “It’s like a spiritual gumbo. You use a little bit of everything in your 
practices” (Figure 6.6).4 


Responder Issues 





The growth of traditional Voodoo is becoming popular among nongenera- 
tional practitioners. However, Voodoo in its purest form is found primar- 
ily among those who have come from Haiti and the areas of Africa where 
it is a common family religion. Officers that have a background in dealing 
with the Haitian population will most likely see the subtle outward signs of 
traditional Voodoo. Officers should be reminded that Voodoo is a very rich 
tradition among Haitian families and is considered sacred. Intelligence on 
criminal activities from this community might be difficult to obtain. 
Florida Water is a substance used in Voodoo rites for cleansing rituals. 
It is a widely available “perfume” that is made from various floral oils and 
alcohol. A 1998 New York Times article reported that a Haitian immigrant 
from Long Island, New York, sought out the services of a Voodoo priest to 
perform a ritual cleansing on her. The priest covered the lady with a sheet 


108 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


and began to douse her with Florida Water cologne to rid her of evil spirits. 
The priest then set the sheet on fire, which immediately lit the flammable 
cologne and left the lady with third degree burns on her face.* Responders 
should be aware of the uses of Florida Water and other ritual liquids that can 
be flammable if exposed to heat. 

Responders may discover cuts on the patient. The ritual Garde may be 
evident on the patient’s skin. One Mambo communicated to me that the cut 
may appear like raised scar tissue. 

Several objects are considered sacred and officers are advised to use cau- 
tion when handling them. Handling these objects in front of practitioners 
could produce violent behavior. If an officer must investigate items, it is sug- 
gested that he/she keep practitioners away from the area. 

Some aspects of trance possession can include possible harmful activi- 
ties. It is said that initiates who become possessed by the Loa Ezili Je Wouj, 
also known as Red Eyes, will rub red pepper in their eyes during possession. 

Officers encountering rituals may find several tools, such as swords and 
blades, that are used in the ceremony. Always use caution when entering cer- 
emony areas. 

Law enforcement personnel may arrive during a spirit possession. If pos- 
sible allow the leader of the group to stop the possession. Remove followers 
from the ritual area when touching the possessed subject. 

Officers should use caution when examining altars and ritual jars and 
bottles. Toxic powders may be present and can cause damage to the investi- 
gating officer. 

Officers should also be aware of state animal statutes regarding use of 
animals in religious sacrifices. 

Again, respect tempered with caution is the rule. Be sure that you have 
sufficient probable cause or a real emergency before disturbing any reli- 
gious ceremony. 


References 


1. Brown, Karen McCarthey, Mama Lola: A Voudou Priestess in Brooklyn, Berke- 
ley, University of California Press, 2001. 

2. Consentino, Donald J., Sacred Arts of Haitian Voudou, Los Angeles, Califor- 
nia, University of Los Angeles Fowler Museum, 1995. 

3. Personal communication with Houngan Hector, leader of Sosyete Gade Nou 
Leve, Sicklerville, New Jersey. 

4. Personal communication with Mambo Sallie Glassman, La Source Ancienne 
Ounfo, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

5. New York Times, 1998. A Voodoo priest is charged with burning of a woman. 
April 8. 


Curanderismo 


Assessing the Scene 


You and your partner are transporting an elderly female patient to the emer- 
gency room. The patient begins to complain of chest pains and starts to cry, 
“Empacho, Empacho.” As you check the patient’s vitals, you notice that she is 
clutching a small red and black bracelet. 


Responders who encounter practitioners of Curanderismo will find a diverse 
collection of folk treatments that have survived throughout history in the 
Latin community. 

Curanderismo is a blanket term used to describe the traditional folk 
healing practices of Mexican and Spanish American communities. The name 
Curanderismo comes from a Spanish word Currar, which means “to heal.” 
Curanderismo mixes cultural aspects of Aztec, African, Native American 
and European witchcraft religious cultures. 

Curanderismo may be utilized by members of various faiths, but it does 
not hold its participants to a particular dogma or sacred text. Curanderismo 
is an alternative method of healing for many in the Hispanic community. It 
is more accurate to describe Curanderismo as a practice that works alongside 
religion other than being a religion unto itself. 


Beliefs and Practices 





Practitioners of Curanderismo typically are Catholic and recognize the deity 
of the Christian God as well as the saints of the Catholic Church. The saints 
are recognized as spiritual helpers along with a number of “folk saints” (Fig- 
ure 7.1). These saints are spiritual “personalities” that originate with the com- 
bination of Spanish Catholic saints and regional indigenous beliefs.' 

Folk saints, such as Our Lady of Guadalupe, are recognized for their his- 
torical and spiritual legacies (Figure 7.2). Each folk saint has the ability to 
grant spiritual powers to those that call upon him/her. For example, Saint 
Martin de Porres is a folk saint recognized for helping the poor. His mythol- 
ogy tells of his mercy toward a poor man and how he was rewarded by God for 


109 


110 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 7.1 An altar dedicated to the folk saints of Curanderismo. 


his service. Today followers of Curanderismo may place his picture in their 
homes as an object of hope that they may receive riches and avoid poverty. 

There are a number of folk saints that are recognized in the practice 
of Curanderismo (Figure 7.3). Following are some of the saints and their 
characteristics. 


Our Lady of Guadalupe 


One of the most popular folk saints of Curanderismo is Our Lady of Guadal- 
upe. She appeared as a manifestation of the Virgin Mary to a peasant named 
Juan Diego on the hill of Tonantzin near Mexico City. The legend surround- 
ing the Virgin is that she told Juan Diego to build a temple to her and to tell 
others about her appearance, Miraculously, roses began to grow and Juan 
was told to pick them. An image of Mary also appeared on the cloak of Juan 
Diego. The Virgin is honored every year with a pilgrimage to the spot where 
she appeared. Some believe that she is the modern manifestation of an Aztec 
goddess. Curanderismo teaches that she will answer prayers and wipe the 
tears from her followers’ eyes. 


Curanderismo 111 





Figure 7.2 An altar dedicated to Our Lady of Guadalupe. Some believe the saint 
to be the reincarnation of an Aztec goddess known as Tonantzin. The spiritual 
work performed using this figure combines aspects of the Catholic faith and 
magical rites found in European witchcraft and African traditional religions. 


San Martin de Porres 


San Martin was a Dominican friar who gave selflessly to help others. He 
established an orphanage for children and a hospital for children. Followers 
pray to him for help with finances. 


San Martin Caballero 


San Martin Caballero was a centurion in the Roman army. One day, San Mar- 
tin was riding his horse and came upon a beggar. The beggar had no clothes, 
so San Martin tore his cloak and gave half of it to the beggar. That evening 
San Martin had a dream that the beggar turned into Jesus. San Martin left 
the army and became a monk. San Martin will help followers by bringing 
strangers to give aid to his followers. Some businesses will display images of 
San Martin Caballero (Figure 7.4). 


112 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 7.3 Responders may encounter statues of folk saints and offerings to the 
spirits that they represent. 





Figure 7.4 Folk saints, such as San Martin Caballero, bring good fortune to 
those who honor him in their homes and businesses. 


Judas Tudeo 


Also known as Saint Jude, Judas Tudeo is a relative of Jesus. His name means 
“Praises given to God” and “Brave to proclaim the faith.” Followers pray to 
him because he is the saint of impossible causes. One informant claims that 
people pray to Saint Jude for jobs and opportunities to work. 


Curanderismo 113 


Santa Marta 


Santa Marta is a saint who was known for taming a crocodile and, in some 
legends, a dragon. Marta is called upon to break women of infidelity and to 
command or compel a person to do your bidding. Some sources list her as a 
source of fierce protection. 


San Simon 


Also known as Maximon, San Simon is depicted as a man in a dark suit and 
hat. He is usually depicted as sitting in a chair. Cultural researchers note that 
San Simon is actually a Pre-Columbian Mayan deity. He is given offerings 
of Coca-Cola, cigarettes and alcohol. He provides financial success to those 
who pray to him. 


Jesus Malverde 


Jesus Malverde was a Mexican bandit who was hanged by police in 1909. The 
image of Malverde is honored as the “narco-saint” by members of the drug 
trade. His image depicts the mustached bandit sitting in a chair or standing. 


Juan Soldado 


Juan Soldado is a folk saint who is honored primarily in Mexico and in the 
Southwestern United States. Soldado was a Mexican soldier who was falsely 
accused of the rape and murder of a young girl. Soldado was executed for the 
girl’s death. His image is revered for providing good health and protection 
for immigrants crossing the United States—Mexico border. 


Dr. Jose Gregorio Hernandez 


Dr. Jose Gregorio Hernandez is a folk saint who is honored for his healing pow- 
ers. Hernandez, commonly knownas Jose Gregorio, was a Venezuelan physician 
who provided healthcare to impoverished patients free of charge. After his death, 
Hernandez became elevated to the status of a saint by local communities. 


San Toribio Romo 


Toribio Romo is a folk saint who is honored on altars and in shrines for his 
power to protect immigrants from authorities. Romo was a Catholic priest 
who was killed in 1928 by Mexican soldiers. His reputation as a benevolent 
giver to the poor and hungry is still honored by his followers. 


114 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 7.5 Santa Muerte is a folk saint who is reported to be honored as the 
patron saint of criminals. Her icon has been found in several cases involving 
narcotics traffickers who insist that she provides them protection from the law. 


Santa Muerte 


Santa Muerte is also known as Santisima Muerte and The Lady in White. 
Controversy surrounds the exact origin of this folk saint. Some historians 
have connected her image to an Aztec deity while some believe she is an 
inversion of the Lady of Guadalupe. She is depicted as a skeleton with the 
clothing of the Virgin Mary. Offerings of apples, coins, flowers and perfumes 
are given to her. She is also the subject of controversy because she is used by 
narco traffickers (drug dealers) in Mexico. Many use her image because they 
believe she is simply a folk saint who relates to the poor and downtrodden 
(Figure 7.5). 


Other Folk Saints 


Practitioners of Curanderismo also recognize a special group of folk healers 
who were elevated to sainthood by locals who knew them. The three healers, 
known as Los Tres Grandes or Three Great Ones, are Don Pedrito Jaramillo, 
Nino Fidencio and Teresita Urrea. These three figures were recognized as 
being gifted healers who served mankind with special spiritual gifts and can 
still be accessed by practitioners. 

Don Pedrito Jaramillo was known as the Saint of Falfarrias. He was born 
in 1829 in Mexico. He learned that he had the gift of healing when he fell 
from a horse and was able to heal himself. People from all over the coun- 
try traveled to be healed by Don Pedrito until he died in 1907. His shrine 


Curanderismo 115 


in Falfarrias, Texas, is visited every year by thousands of followers who pay 
homage to this folk saint. 

Nino Fidencio was born in Mexico in 1898. He worked with a German 
doctor for years during which time he discovered his ability to heal. Follow- 
ers, known as Fidencistas, travel to his shrine every year to be healed. Some 
spiritualists believe that they can “channel” the spirit of Nino to heal others. 

Teresita Urrea was known as the Saint of Cabora. Born in Mexico in 1873, 
Teresita was an apprentice to a Curandera (female healer). She was attacked by 
aman and almost raped. She lapsed into a coma and those around her thought 
she was dead and prepared for her funeral. She suddenly awoke from the coma 
and three days later her mentor died. Teresita took her place and became 
famous as a healer. She was involved in encouraging the Yaqui Indians to fight 
for their homeland. Many followers, known as Teresistas, wore images of her 
on their clothing during battles with the government. Teresista died in exile in 
the United States in 1906 at the age of 33, allegedly from overwork. 


Group Structure 





The central figure that provides healing in Curanderismo is the Curan- 
dero (females are known as Curanderas). These healers use special spiri- 
tual abilities to heal others. These abilities are called El Don de Dios or 
Gift from God.’ The gift to heal may be something that the Curandero or 
Curandera is born with. Some children are recognized as being potential 
healers from a very young age. Some Curanderos do not realize their gift of 
healing until they receive a spiritual “calling” in their lives. Some healers 
are simply individuals who become apprentices to established healers in 
the community. 

The role of the Curandero plays a very important part in the life of the 
community. He acts as a counselor, doctor and even exorcist. The Curandero 
may be very public about his role as a healer or he may be known only to 
certain members in the community. Publicly known Curanderos may oper- 
ate spiritual supply stores known as Botanicas or Yerberas (Figure 7.6). Some 
Curanderos are very discreet about their presence in the local community. 
Misunderstanding by outside cultures and the unregulated prescription of 
treatments are just a few of the reasons that some remain secretive about 
their presence. One Curandero who was interviewed explained that his rea- 
son for not advertising his services was that he relied on word of mouth from 
members of the Hispanic community and that the established healthcare 
industry would try to shut him down. The Curandero said, “The hospital 
charges thousands of dollars for what I can do for little or no money.” 

Curanderos may also call on the assistance of additional “specialists” in 
folk healing. The Sobadora is a therapeutic masseuse who can apply mas- 


116 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 7.6 Amulets and talismans are sold by the Curandero/Curandera to pro- 
vide health and healing. 





Figure 7.7 Herbs may be prescribed by a Yerbero who serves as an herbal spe- 
cialist to the Hispanic community. 


sage techniques to aching muscles. The Yerbero provides specialized herbal 
treatments for patients (Figure 7.7). The Albolaius specializes in combating 
witchcraft or Brujeria in patients who have been cursed. The Partera serves 
as a midwife who provides services for women in labor. The office of Huesero 
sets bones for those who have injuries to bone structure. 


Curanderismo 117 


Healing and Sickness 





There are a number of illnesses that are brought about by natural phenomena 
as well as a number that come by supernatural means. The Curandero may 
prescribe treatments to sicknesses that are classified as “folk illnesses.” 

One of the main principles that the Curanderismo observes comes from 
the Greek concept of wellness. The Greek concept of “humors” teaches that 
the human body has a certain balance of “hot” and “cold” principles.* These 
principles can be thrown off by various illnesses. Low metabolic rates result- 
ing from colds and pneumonia may affect the cold concept. High metabolic 
rates from shock and diabetes may affect the hot concept. The treatment phi- 
losophy is to approach the cold’s imbalance with a hot remedy. Likewise, the 
hot imbalance is treated with a cold treatment. 

The goal is to restore harmony to these concepts. This may be resolved 
using teas, oils, herbs and foods. 

There are a number of common folk illnesses recognized by their folk 
names. The following are some of the more widely recognized illnesses: 


Mal Aire: This sickness is caused by exposure to air. Symptoms include 
nausea, vomiting, headaches, twitching of facial muscles and chills. 
Empacho: This sickness is caused by food being trapped in the intestinal 

wall. Symptoms include constipation, loss of appetite and bloating. 

Caida de Mollera: Also known as Fallen Fontanelle. This sickness is 
caused by the fontanelle (soft spot on newborn’s head) caving in on the 
soft palate. Some believe this condition is caused by a mother removing 
her child from her breast during breastfeeding. Symptoms include colic 
and loss of appetite. 

Encono: Also known as Festering of Wounds. This is caused by infections 
to a wound by interacting with someone. Symptoms include worsening 
of a wound. 

Mal de Ojo: Also known as the Evil Eye. The evil eye is a concept that is 
observed by many different world cultures. The concept is that someone 
can inflict harm by looking upon someone with envy. This envy may man- 
ifest either intentionally or unintentionally. A casual admiration at a child 
can cause Mal de Ojo. Symptoms include physical or emotional sickness. 

Malificia: Also known as Witchcraft or Brujeria. Sickness caused by 
malevolent magic or curses against someone. Symptoms include emo- 
tional and physical disturbances and disease. 

Melarchico: Also known as Melancholy. Sickness caused by change in the 
environment. Symptoms include loss of appetite and depression. 

Susto: Also known as Fright or Shock. Sickness caused by an emotional 
shock. Symptoms include depression, insomnia and nightmares. 


118 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Billis: Sickness caused by suppressed anger. Symptoms include excessive 
bile, headache, tension and gastrointestinal sickness. 

Mal de Latido: Palpitations symptoms in the chest; pulsating of the stomach. 

Sangre Debil: Also known as Tired Blood. Symptoms include poor appe- 
tite, weakness, and increased sleep. 

Insolacion: Symptoms are similar to sunstroke. 


Most of the folk illnesses can be interpreted with traditional Western 
medical labels by responders. For example, the empacho may be indigestion 
or possible chest pains. The mal aire could be sinus problems or a simple cold. 
Understanding the folk terminology can assist responders in understanding 
patient needs. 

Responders can offer assistance that “complements” the treatments of 
Curanderismo. However, responders may find it challenging to offer comfort 
and protection from magical sicknesses, such as Mal de Ojo. The responder 
should allow the patient to hold whatever objects of protection to feel comfort 
in his/her spiritual worldview. As always, if a responder does not subscribe 
to the patient’s beliefs system, he should still treat the patient and patient’s 
worldview with respect. 


Methods of Healing 


Curanderismo provides a holistic approach to healing that incorporates 
the emotional, mental and physical body. Healing may come from a ritual 
or from a prescription from a Curandero or even possibly a remedy that is 
taught by members of the community. The Remedios Caseros (or home rem- 
edy) may be something as basic as a bowl of soup or an herbal tea. 

The Curandero relies on a number of ritualistic practices in provident 
treatment of his clients. One of the most common rituals involves the use of 
an object to “sweep” away sickness. The Baridda (or sweeping) may involve 
herbs, lemons, eggs or flowers. These objects may be passed over the body of 
the client to rid him/her of negative influences, called Vibraciones Malos, 
that are causing sickness. The objects may also be used to sweep positive 
influences over the infected individual, called Vibraciones Positivas. Prayers 
are spoken over the individual during the sweeping, which can include the 
Lord’s Prayer and the Apostles Creed. A ritual cleansing (or Limpiza) may 
use an egg or an animal passed over the body of the client to “clean” them 
of a sickness. The animal may be killed, but the egg is traditionally placed in 
a glass under the client’s bed. If by morning, the egg has become cooked or 
bloody, it has been successful in taking away the illness. 

A ritual using incense to “cleanse” a home or business may be used by the 
Curandero provident. The Sahumerio is a ritual cleansing of an environment 


Curanderismo 119 


by waving the smoke from the incense into a specified space. The ritual Sorti- 
legio involves the use of objects to “tie up” negative influences that may affect 
a client. Ribbons and cords may be used to tie up artifacts. The Curandero 
may also use candles in the diagnosis of sickness. The pattern in which the 
flame moves or in which the wax burns may provide the healer with spiritual 
insight into the client’s illness. 

Objects may be used to transfer the sickness into a vessel. The treatment 
of folk illnesses, such as Insolacion, may involve a glass of water being placed 
above the client’s head. When the water boils, the sickness has been removed. 
The treatment of stomach problems may be treated with the application to 
the stomach of alcohol-soaked bread and herbs. 


Herbalism 


The use of medicinal herbs (Plantas Medicinales) to heal is a primary healing 
technique used by the Curandero. The specialized knowledge of herbs used 
by the healer does not only recognize the medicinal purposes of herb, but 
also the magical properties of herbs. As in many religious cultures, herbs are 
recognized as living objects that contain energy and vibrations. These ener- 
gies can provide healing for the human body. Herbs are used in home rem- 
edies known as Remedios Caseros. Herbs may be used in a raw form, teas, 
powders, oils and even soaps (Figure 7.8). The following are some examples 
of herbs and their uses in Curanderismo. 





Figure 7.8 Patients may use herbal soaps and oils designed to physically and 
spiritually heal aches and pains. 


120 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Chamomile (Manzanilla): Susto, Mal de Ojo 

Borraja: Bladder, infection 

Sage Plant: Formed in shape of a cross and placed under a pillow 
Cactus (Nopal): Diabetes 

Altamisa (Mountain Mugwort): Colds and flu 

Brook Mint (Poleo): Fever and headaches 

Spearmint (Yerba Buena): Nervousness 

Orange Leaves (Te De Nurranjo): Nervousness, acts as a sedative 
Sweet Basil (Albacar): Wards off evil spirits 


Objects of Healing 


There are a number of objects used in healing as well as for luck and protec- 
tion. Patients who wear or display these objects should be allowed to keep 
them unless the object is threatening the health of the patient. Many healing 
objects appear to be very mundane, but they do provide personal comfort 
to the patient. Beans, beads, necklaces and herbal amulets may be worn by 
the patient (Figure 7.9). Many objects of healing and protection will be deco- 
rated with images of saints and important spiritual personalities. Some of 
the widely used objects and their descriptions are as follows: 


Horseshoe Amulet 

The horseshoe is an object of luck. Patients may have a horseshoe made of 
garlic above the door of their home or business. The garlic keeps away evil. 
Horseshoes may be found in a miniature form on necklaces, bracelets and 
amulet bags. One amulet is found in the form of a shadowbox frame that 
contains a horseshoe, an image of Saint Martin de Cabellero, beads, coins 
and beans. 





Figure 7.9 Patients may wear necklaces dedicated to folk saints. This necklace 
is used for protection and depicts Our Lady of Guadalupe and the bandit Jesus 
Malverde. 


Curanderismo 121 


Lodestone 

The lodestone, called Piedra Iman, is used as an amulet in a number of forms. 
The stone contains magnetic properties that are said to “pull” or attract posi- 
tive desires. The stone may be placed in a small bag and “fed” magnetic par- 
ticles to make it grow in size. Lodestone may be placed in a bag along with 
beads, coins, beans and a horseshoe. These amulets provide protection of 
health, family and success. 


Scapulario 
The Scapular is a cloth worn by Catholics that displays an image ofa saint. Follow- 
ers of Curandrismo may wear images of the folk saint, such as Santa Muerte. 


Milagro 

The Milagro (or Miracle) is a miniature body part that is used to represent 
the appendage that is in need of healing, The Milagro may be found placed 
on images of saints to bring about healing. 


La Manito de Coral 
This black image of a hand represents the “hand of God.” 


Ojo de Venado 

Also known as Deer's Eye (Figure 7.10). This is one of the more widely available 
amulets available at various Latin markets throughout the United States. The 
object provides protection from the Mal de Ojo (or Evil Eye) (Figure 7.10). The 





Figure 7.10 The Ojo De Vando or Deer’s Eye is used to ward off the evil eye or 
Mal de Ojo. Responders should allow patients to wear amulets such as this if the 
patient feels it necessary. 


122 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Figure 7.11 An amulet used to ward off the evil eye. Responders may encounter 
amulets hanging above doorways when responding to calls. 


amulet is a velvet bean, also known as a buckeye, wrapped in red cord (Fig- 
ure 7.11). The bean may have an image of a saint decorated on it. There are sev- 
eral variations of the Ojo De Venado. Some include the Manito de Coral or 
Hand of God in the amulet. 


Responder Issues 





Responders may find that practitioners want to use folk healing remedies 
alongside the treatment that responders are trying to provide. Allow the 
patient to use their cultural remedy if it does not create a hazard in providing 
treatment. If the remedy or ritual is taking time that is necessary to provide 
emergency treatment, advise the patient in a respectful and patient manner 
of the urgency. 

Dr. Antonio N. Zavaleta* points out that many chronic ailments, such as 
diabetes and arthritis, go untreated in the Mexican American community. 
For this reason, it’s essential that folk healers be networked with medical 
professionals. However, Dr. Zavaleta also cautions that not all healers are 
reputable and some can cause a great deal of harm. 

Responders assessing scenes may discover that smoke from burning 
incense is creating a hazard for the patient. If necessary, ask the patient or 


Curanderismo 123 





Figure 7.12 The Curandero is the local healer, psychiatrist and priest. Through 
the use of herbs, candles and the spiritual realm, the Curandero provides treat- 
ment to those in the Latin community. 


any others present to extinguish the incense. Responders may also be advised 
that incense in a poorly ventilated environment cause health problems. 

Responders may discover that the patient has ingested herbal remedies. If 
herbs are present, they may not be properly labeled. Responders may find the 
folk name of herbs on bottles and bags. Ask the patient if you may take the 
herbs with you for identification purposes. Herb names may appear accord- 
ing to their folk name, their botanical name, in Spanish and in English. Some 
herbal remedies may contain lead and can cause illness. 

Some Curanderos (Figure 7.12) have suggested to clients seeking an abor- 
tion to use Rue or Ruda. Rue is a traditional abortifacient (causing abortion). 
Rue stimulates the uterus and nervous system. Rue can irritate kidneys and 
cause liver degeneration. 

One folk treatment for Fallen Fontanelle is having an adult suck on the 
anterior fontanelle. This sucking can cause bruising on the head. The child 
may also be held upside down for one minute while the child’s feet are tapped 
three times. Some responders have observed that the sunken fontenelle may 
be a symptom of dehydration. 

Patients who consult Curanderos and receive directions to use herbal 
treatments may not be given exact dosage information. An overdose of an 
herb could result in sickness or even death. 

Some healers do cross the border into the United States to perform 
services for patients. Responders may discover hesitancy from patients 
to discuss their healer if the healer is in the United States without proper 
authorization. 


124 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Reference 


1. Spielberg, Joseph and Zavaleta, Antonio. Historic Folk Sainthood along the 
Texas-Mexico Border, Research Project and Web site at: http://www.vpea.utb. 
edu/elnino/researcharticles/historicfolksainthood. html 

2. Handbook of Texas Online: Web site at: http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/hand- 
book/online/articles/CC/sdcl.html 

3. Torres, Eliseo. The Folk Healer: The Mexican Tradition of Curanderismo. Albu- 
querque, NM: Nieves Press, 1985. 

4. Zavaleta, Antonio N., “Do cultural factors affect Hispanic health status?” Pro- 
ceedings of the Rio Grande Valley Public Health Community Conference, 
Rio Grand Valley, TX sponsored by UTHSC-School of Public Health, June 
8,2000. 


Closing Issues 


Behavior 





In order to assess if the patient views an illness as spiritual in nature, respond- 
ers should watch for references to gods or spirits. Patients who use religious 
objects may be using them as protection from spiritual harm. Prayer and 
chanting may also be an indication that the patient believes an illness is spiri- 
tual in nature. 


Language 





Realize that language may also present an additional factor in communicat- 
ing with patients of various nationalities. Members may require the use of 
translators in order to effectively communicate needs and issues. 


Patience 





Understand that cultures respond to stresses in different ways. 


Communication 


Ask questions slowly and one at a time. 

Determine what religious aspects are important to the patient and deter- 
mine a common goal for you and the patient. Stress that your goal is not 
to disturb the religious practices used in healing, but that you are there to 
“complement” these practices.! 

Realize that fear of authority may create an obstacle in communicating 
with your patient. A patient who may use bizarre or even illegal practices in 
observing religious traditions may be scared to communicate with authori- 
ties for fear of being arrested. Some patients may fear that responders may 
not understand the practices and customs of a religion and will treat them 
differently. It is important that as a responder you convey a sense of concern 
for the patient’s health despite the religious preferences of the patient. 


125 


126 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


It is understandable that rituals and artifacts of a religious culture may 
appear intimidating to responders who have never encountered them before. 
Even if your personal outlook on these items is one of, perhaps, fear, you 
should remain focused on the task of assisting the patients and creating a safe 
environment for them and yourself. Do not show shock or offense in front of 
a patient when encountering these items. 

In the healthcare field, a popular approach to other cultures is found 
in a strategy known as “Kleinman’s Tool to Elicit Health Beliefs in Clinical 
Encounters.”* The following are questions used in assessing the cultural atti- 
tude toward health from the patient’s worldview. 


1. What do you call your problem? What name does it have? 

2. What do you think caused your problem? 

3. Why do you think it started when it did? 

4, What does your sickness do to you? How does it work? 

5. How severe is it? Will it have a short or long course? 

6. What do you fear most about your disorder? 

7. What are the chief problems that your sickness has caused for you? 
8. What kind of treatment do you think you should receive? 

9. What are the important results you hope to receive from treatment? 


Generalizations 
Some of the artifacts and rituals in many of the African traditional religions 
may appear similar, but are very different. A responder that refers to a San- 
teria altar as Voodoo in the presence of a patient may find that the patient 
is offended by this misidentifying of a culture. Before risking offending a 
patient, ask them about their culture. 

It’s also important to remember that ideal norms of conduct may differ 
from the actual behavior of the practitioner you encounter. 


References 


1. Andrews, Margaret M. Transcultural Concepts in Nursing Care, Scott, Fores- 
man and Company, Glenview, IL, 1989, chap. 13. 

2. Kleinman, Arthur. Kleinman’s tool to elicit health beliefs in clinical encoun- 
ters, in Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture. University of California 
Press, Berkeley, CA, 1981. 


Glossary of 
Cultural Terms 


Responders may discover terms used by member of various magico-religious 
faiths that are used only within the specific religious cultures. The following 
is a glossary of commonly used terms in the magico-religious communities 
(religious cultures are in italics). 


Addimu (Regla de Ocha) A lesser offering in Santeria. Usually consists of 
fruits and nonblood-containing items. 


Akasha (Wicca) Term used to describe the spirit. 


Akashic Records (Wicca) A library of records of past events and memories 
of every human being. 


Aleyo (Regla de Ocha) A noninitiate to Santeria. Literally means “stranger” 
or outsider. 


Ashe (Regla de Ocha) Term used to describe the “magic” of the Orishas in 
Santeria. Ache is divine energy. 


Asiento (Regla de Ocha) “Making the Saint” in Santeria. Asiento is the 
term used to describe placing or “seating” of the Orisha into the head of the 
initiate. 

Aspects (Wicca) Term used to describe the qualities of a deity. For exam- 
ple, Hecate is an aspect of the goddess. 


Asson (Voodoo) A rattle used in Voodoo by initiated clergy. Typically cov- 
ered in beads or snake bones. 


Baba (Regla de Ocha) Term meaning Father. 


Babalawo (Regla de Ocha) He is the Father of the Secrets. The term is used 
to denote the high priest in Santeria that can use the Table of Ifa divination 
system. 


Babalocha (Regla de Ocha) Term used to denote the male initiate in 
Santeria. 


127 


128 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Baka (Voodoo) Dwarf-like spirit invoked by a Voodoo priest for 
protection. 


Banish (Wicca) ‘The act of driving away negative energy or spirits. 
Bata (Regla de Ocha) Sacred drums used in Santeria ceremonies. 
Bembe (Regla de Ocha) Ritual party for the Orishas of Santeria. 
Billis (Curanderismo) Illness caused by suppressed anger. 


Bilongo (Regla de Ocha and Las Reglas de Congo) A spell or medicine, usu- 
ally found in the form of a “bundle.” 


Bind (Wicca) Term used to describe a magical action that stops someone 
from performing an action, such as abuse, theft or harm. 


Bosal (Voodoo) Term meaning “wild” or “untamed” Refers to an initiate 
who has not learned to work with spirits. 


Boveda (Regla de Ocha) The altar used to honor the Eggun (ancestors). 


Brujeria (Curanderismo/Regla de Ocha) ‘Term used to describe malevolent 
sorcery. 


BTW (Wicca) Nickname for British traditional witchcraft, which is a term 
used to describe a number of Wiccan traditions that originated in the New 
Forest region of England. 


Cantos (Regla de Ocha) Song used to praise the Orishas. 
Centering (Wicca) Making oneself balanced and mentally focused. 


Chamalongo (Las Reglas de Congo) Divination system using coconut shells 
to interact with the spirits. 


Cone of Power (Wicca) Term used to describe the energy that is raised 
during a Wiccan ritual. 


Coven (Wicca) Anassembly of witches. 
Cowan (Wicca) Term used to denote a non-Wiccan. 


Craft, the (Wicca) Term used to describe the activities and beliefs of 
witches. 


Cuchillo (Regla de Ocha) ‘The knife used to make sacrifices in Santeria. 
Curandera (Curanderismo) The traditional title for a female healer. 
Curandero (Curanderismo) The traditional title for a male healer. 


Darle Coco El Santo (Regla de Ocha) Divination system using the 
coconut. 


Appendix B: Glossary of Cultural Terms 129 


Deosil (Wicca) A term used to describe moving clockwise around a circle 
during a ritual. 


Despojo (Regla de Ocha) A cleansing ceremony in Santeria. 
Diloggun (Regla de Ocha) Divination system using the cowrie shells. 
Don (Curanderismo) A gift from God. 


Ebbo (Regla de Ocha) A major sacrifice in Santeria. The blood from ani- 
mals is typically used to receive Ache from the Orishas. 


Eggun (Regla de Ocha/Las Reglas de Congo) Term used to describe the 
dead or ancestors. The Eggun are honored in rituals and through the altars 
known as Boveda. 


Elementals (Wicca) Personifications of the elements of Earth, Wind, Water 
and Fire. 


Empacho (Curanderismo) Illness caused by food lodged in the digestive 
tract. 


Esbat (Wicca) Term used to denote the meetings held according to the 
changing phases of the moon. Some covens meet only on days of the full 
moon. 


Ewe (Regla de Ocha) The Ewe are the herbs and plants used in Santeria. 
Fam-Trad (Wicca) Term used to describe Family Traditions of witchcraft. 


Firma (Las Reglas de Congo) The signatures of the spirits in Kongo religions. 
The firma are typically drawn to invoke the spiritual presence of a deity. 


Fula (Las Reglas de Congo) Gunpowder used in Congo-based rituals. 


Garde (Voodoo) A ritual scarring in which magical protection is placed on 
an individual. 


Gros-Bon-Ange (Voodoo) ‘The “big guardian angel” that is part of man. 
The term refers to the psyche of humanity. 


Grounding (Wicca) Term used to describe the release of excess energy at 
the end of a ritual. 


Guerreros (Regla de Ocha) ‘The warrior Orishas of Santeria, they include 
Eleggua, Oggun and Ochosi. Osun is also received with these Orishas. 


Idé (Regla de Ocha) ‘The beaded bracelet that is owned by Orun. The brace- 
let is colored yellow and green and protects the owner from death. 


Ifa (Regla de Ocha) Ifa is a West African system of divination. It also means 
“fate.” 


130 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Iku (Regla de Ocha) The spirit of death. 


Ile (Regla de Ocha) Term used to mean house. The ile is the fellowship of 
practitioners. 


Iya (Regla de Ocha) Iya is known as the “mother” of the sacred Bata drums 
used in ceremonies. 


Iyalocha (Regla de Ocha) Term used to denote female initiates in Santeria. 


Iyawo (Regla de Ocha) The initiate in Santeria. Iyawo means the “bride” of 
the Orisha. 


Kariocha (Regla de Ocha) ‘The ceremony in which the initiate becomes a 
priest/priestess. 


Karma (Wicca) A concept from Eastern religion referring to the good or 
evil deeds that a person may commit and the result of these deeds. 


Lady (Wicca) ‘Term of respect for a High Priestess. 

La Place (Voodoo) Master of ceremonies at a Voodoo ritual. 
Lave-tet (Voodoo) Head washing ceremony. 

Loa (Voodoo) The deities or spirits of Voodoo. 


Los Tres Grandes (Curanderismo) Term used to refer to the Three Great 
Healers: El Nino Findenco, Don Pedrito Jaramillo and Teresita. 


Lucumi (Regla de Ocha) Term describing the Yoruba people in Cuba. 


Macuto (Regla de Ocha/Las Reglas de Congo) Amulet filled with herbs and 
Ache. 


Malferefun (Regla de Ocha) Lucumi term for “praised be.” 
Mal de Ojo (Curanderismo) The illness known as the Evil Eye. 


Mal Dyok (Maldjok) (Voodoo) The term used to denote the Evil Eye in the 
Haitian community. 


Mambo (Las Reglas de Congo/Voodoo) In Kongo religions, the Mambo is 
a song used to invoke a spirit. In Voodoo, the Mambo is the priestess of the 
religion. 


Menga (Las Reglas de Congo) Menga means “blood” in the Kikongo lan- 
guage. Animal blood is offered to the Nganga in the Kongo religions. 


Moyuba (Regla de Ocha) An invocational prayer in Santeria. 


Mpungo (Las Reglas de Congo) ‘The Bantu deities in Palo Mayombe and 
other Kongo traditions. 


Appendix B: Glossary of Cultural Terms 131 


Nganga (Las Reglas de Congo) A term originally used to describe the healer 
in West African Bantu religions. It is used in contemporary practices to 
describe the sacred vessel that houses the spirits. The Nganga is usually an 
iron cauldron or a ceramic pot. 


Nkisi (Las Reglas de Congo) The term used to originally describe the sacred 
medicines and bundles used by Bantu priests. The Nkisi is used to denote the 
material object that houses the spirits of the dead. 


Nkobos (Las Reglas de Congo) Divination system using seashells. 
Obi (Regla de Ocha) ‘The coconut oracle used in Santeria. 
Orishas (Regla de Ocha) The deities of Santeria. 


Otan (Regla de Ocha) ‘The sacred stone that contains the essence of the 
Orisha. 


Padrino (Regla de Ocha) Term used to describe the spiritual godfather who 
initiates a believer. 


Palero/Palera (Las Reglas de Congo) The office of priest or priestess in Palo 
Mayombe and Kongo faiths. 


Palo Christianos (Las Reglas de Congo) A term used to describe those 
practitioners who dedicate their vessels to the benevolent deity Nzambi. 


Palo Judias (Las Reglas de Congo) A term used to describe those practitio- 
ners who dedicate their vessels to Kadiempembe or Lukankasi, which has been 
interpreted by some as the devil. 


Partera (Curanderismo) Healer who serves as a midwife. 


Pataki (Las Reglas de Congo) ‘The myths and legends used to communicate 
the rituals and beliefs of the Orishas. 


Piedra Iman (Curanderismo) A lodestone used in magical workings to 
attract positive energies. 


Poteau-Mitan (Voodoo) ‘The pole in the center of the temple used to call 
Voodoo spirits. 


Prenda (Las Reglas de Congo) A term that means jewel. It is used to refer 
to the Nganga. 


Rama (Las Reglas de Congo) ‘The traditions or “branches” of the Kongo 
religions. 


Rayado (Las Reglas de Congo) The ritual in which an initiate makes a pact 
with the spirits. Rayado means consecrated and refers to the cutting cere- 
mony. Also known as being “scratched in.” 


132 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Recetas (Curanderismo) The prescriptions given by the healer. 
Resguardo (Las Reglas de Congo) A charm used to protect. 


Sabbat (Wicca) The sacred days that honor the eight festivals celebrating 
the change in seasons. 


Sahumerio (Curanderismo) A ritual in which incense is used to send away 
negative energies. 


Skyclad (Wicca) A term used to describe ritual nudity. 


Sobador (Curanderismo) A healer who uses massage techniques for 
healing. 


Susto (Curanderismo) Shock or loss of spirit due to trauma. 


Tambor (Regla de Ocha) A ceremony in which the sacred drums are 
played. 

Tata (Las Reglas de Congo) A term used to mean Father. Used to describe 
an office of initiation in Palo Mayombe. 


Ti-Bon-Ange (Ti-Bon-Anj) (Voodoo) The “little guardian angel” that com- 
poses the soul. The angel is compared to consciousness. 


Voodon Original term used for “spirit” that later became voodoo. Voodon 
is a term used many times to describe a voodoo-type aspect and is used inter- 
changeably with voodoo. 


Wanga (Voodoo) Charm used for malevolent workings. 


Watchtower (Wicca) The term used to describe the elements and their direc- 
tion. The Guardians of the Watchtower are called to protect the ritual space 
during the ceremony. 


Widdershins (Wicca) Ritual action of moving counterclockwise in a 
circle. Used to get rid of energy. 


Yerbero (Curanderismo) Title used by healers who use herbal treatments. 


Index of Symbols 


The following are some of the images that responders may discover during 
calls involving magico-religious groups. 


Symbols of Asatru 





Odin’s Rune: One of the letters in the 
Runic alphabet. Associated with the deity 
Odin. 





Nine Worlds: Image representing the cos- 
mology or universe of the Asatru. 





Valknot: Also known as Knot of the Slain. 
Used for protective purposes. 


133 


134 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Tyr Rune: Rune representing the deity Tyr, 
the god of war and heroic glory. 


Thor’s Hammer: Also known as Mjolnir. 
Represents the tool of the deity Thor. 





Solar Cross: An ancient symbol used to 
represent the movement of the sun. 


Symbols of Voodoo 


Agwe: The Loa representing nature and the 
woods. 





Index of Symbols 135 


Ogou: The god of metal and iron. 


Legba: The Loa that opens the crossroads 
and fate. 


Dambalah: The Loa that purifies initiates, 
rules the marketplace. 


Erzulie: Loa of the dead (Ghede). 


Gran Bois: Wife of Baron Samedi. She pro- 
tects gravestones. 





136 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 


Symbols of Wicca 





® 
* 
rx 
oS 
T 


Pentagram: Image that represents the ele- 
ments subdued by spirits. 


Horned God: Image representing the male 
aspect of deity. 


Triple Goddess: Image representing the 
maiden, mother and crone phases of the 
goddess. 


Wheel of the Year: An Egyptian symbol of 
life and rebirth. 


Labrys: A symbol that represents the 
female element. 


Index of Symbols 137 


Us Lambrynth: Also known as the Triskele, 
the image represents several different con- 
cepts, including the goddess and the Trinity 
of Christianity. 


Symbols of Palo Mayombe and other 
Kongo Religious Cultures 


Lucero: The signature or Firma used to 
invoke the Mpungu that opens the spiritual 
realm. 


4 


Zarabanda: The firma used to invoke the 


1 Mpungu over iron and war. 


C 
— Nfumbe: A symbol used in rituals involv- 
ing the spirits of the dead. 




















138 Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 





Fula: A symbol used in rituals while using 
A Fula (gunpowder). 


Mother Kengue: A symbol used to represent 
an aspect of Tiembla Tierra, the Mpungu 
that rules hills and mountains. 











Magical Working: An example of a drawing 
t used in ritual work. 


Subject Index 


A 


Account of evil, 8 
Addimu, 56-57, 131 
Aganyu, 47-48, 63 
Agassou, 92 
Aggayu, 58 
Agwe, 93, 101, 104, 128 
Akasha, 131 
Akasha records, 131 
Albacar, 120 
Alexandrian Wicca, 16, 19 
Aleyo, 49, 131 
Altamisa, 120 
Amulet(s), 36 
handling of, 68 
herbal, 120 
horseshoe, 120 
mercury in, 66 


for patient comfort, 86, 121 


Ancestor reverence, 48-49 
Angelica, 32 


Animal sacrifices, 42, 45, 57-58, 81 


Anise, 65 

Arabic gum, 33 
Aromatherapy, 29 
Artemis herb, 33 
Artifacts, 9 

Asatru, 14, 127 
Ashe, 131 

Asiento, 53, 61, 131 
Aspects, 131 

Asson, 96-97, 131 
Athame, 20 
Atipola, 65 

Auric healing, 29-30 
Awe, 8 

Ayido Wedo, 92, 101 
Ayizan, 91 

Azaka, 92, 101, 104 


B 


Baba, 131 

Babalawo, 42, 47, 50, 131 

Babalocha, 50, 132 

Babalu-Aye, 46 
animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
necklace, 51 
offering to, 57 

Baka, 105, 132 

Banishment, 24, 132 

Bantu, 71-73. See also Palo Mayombe 
religious elements, 72-73 
traditions, 71-72 

Baron Lao, 104 

Baron Samedi, 94, 101 

Basil, 33, 65, 120 

Bata, 132 

Belief in supernatural beings, 7 

Bell, 20 

Bembe, 61, 132 

Benzoin, 33 

Billis, 118, 132 

Bilongo, 132 

Bind, 132 

Boliene, 20 

Bones, 75-76 

Book of Shadows, 20 

Borraja, 120 

Bosal, 132 

Bottles, 97 

Boveda, 49, 60, 132 

Brilumba, 71 

British Traditional Wicca (BTW), 16, 132 

Brook mint, 120 

Brujeria, 60, 62, 116, 132 

BTW. See British Traditional Wicca (BTW) 


139 


140 


C 


Cactus, 120 
Caida de Mollera, 117 
Camphor, 65 
Candles, magic, 35 
Cano brava, 76 
Cantos, 132 
Carbonero, 85 
Carrefour, 93 
Cauldron, 27 
Ceiba tree, 86 
Celtic Wicca, 16 
Censer, 20 
Centelle Ndoki, 74 
sacred vessel, 79 
Centering, 132 
Cereke, 85 
Ceremonies, 21 
Chakras, 31 
crown, 31 
heart, 31 
navel, 31 
root, 31 
solar plexus, 31 
third eye, 31 
throat, 31 
Chalice, 20 
Chamalongo, 81, 82, 132 
Chamba, 84, 85 
Chamomile, 33, 65, 120 
Chango, 45 
animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
father, 48 
necklace, 51 
offering, 57 
sons, 47 
Chanting, 29 
Choya Wengue, 74 
Chromolithograph, 97 
Circle, 19 
Common nettle, 33 
Conch shell, 98 
Cone of Power, 24, 132 
Cord healing, 29 
Cords, 21 
Corobane, 32-33 
Correspondences, 21-22 
color, 22 


Subject Index 


Corta Lima, 71 
Coven, 19, 20, 132 
Cowan, 132 
Craft, 37, 132 
Cuchillo, 132 
Cultural competency, 4, 7-8 
Curandera, 115, 116, 132 
Curanderismo, 109-124 
beliefs and practices, 109-115 
folk saints, 109-115 
Dr. Jose Gregorio Hernandez, 
113 
Jesus Malverde, 113 
Juan Soldado, 113 
Judas Tudeo, 112 
Our Lady of Guadalupe, 110-111 
San Martin Caballero, 111, 112 
San Martin de Porres, 111 
San Simon, 113 
San Toribio Romo, 113 
Santa Marta, 113 
Santa Muerte, 114 
group structure, 115-116 
healing and sickness, 117-122 
herbalism, 119-120 
illnesses, 117-118 
Billis, 118 
Caida de Mollera, 117 
Empacho, 117 
Encono, 117 
Insolacion, 118 
Mal Aire, 117 
Mal de Latido, 118 
Mal de Ojo, 117 
Malificia, 117 
Melarchico, 117 
Sangre Debil, 118 
Susto, 117 
methods of healing, 118-120 
objects of healing, 120-122 
horseshoe amulet, 120 
La Manito de Coral, 121 
Lodestone, 121 
Milagro, 121 
Ojo de Venado, 121-122 
Scapulario, 121 
responder issues, 122-123 
Curandero, 115, 132 
Cursed objects, 37 


Subject Index 


D 


Damballah Wedo, 92, 101, 128 
Darle Coco El Santo, 54, 133 
Deadly nightshade, 32 
Deities, 9 

Deosil, 22, 133 

Despojo, 64, 133 

Devil’s apple, 32 

Dianic Wicca, 16 

Diloggun, 56, 133 
Dominican Voodoo, 106 
Don, 133 


Dr. Jose Gregorio Hernandez, 113 


Druidism, 14 
Drums 
Congo, 98 
Petro, 98 
Rada, 98 
Voodoo 
Congo, 98 
Petro, 98 
Rada, 98 


E 


Ebbo, 57-58, 133 
Eclectic Wicca, 16 
Eggun, 48-49, 133 
Elegua, 43-44 
animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
necklace, 51 
offering to, 56 
Elementals, 7, 24, 133 
Elements, 27 
Empacho, 2, 109, 117, 133 
Encono, 117 
Erzulie Dantor, 94, 128 
Esbat, 25, 133 
Espanta Muerto, 85 
Espartillo, 65 
Ewe, 133 
Ezili Danto, 94, 101, 104 
Ezili Freda, 92, 104 


F 


Fam-Trad, 133 
Fennel, 33 


Firma, 77, 78, 83, 84, 130, 133 


First responder issues. See also Responder 


issues 
Curanderismo, 122-123 
harmful implements, 39 
in Palo Mayombe, 86-87 
in Santeria, 67-68 
in Voodooism, 107-108 
weapons, 39 
in Wiccan religion, 38-39 
Flags, 97 
Francisco and Francisca, 80 
Frankincense, 33 
Fula, 81, 84, 130, 133 


G 


Garde, 101, 105, 108, 133 
Garden Angelica, 32 
Garden thyme, 32 
Gardenarian Wicca, 16-17 
Gede, 94, 101, 104 
Georgian Wicca, 17 
Glossary, 131-136 
Gran Bwa, 93, 129 
Greater nettle, 33 
Gros-Bon-Ange, 133 
Ground apple, 33 
Grounding, 22, 31, 133 
Group structure, 19-20 
circle, 19 
coven, 19, 20 
Curanderismo, 115-116 
grove, 19 
order, 19 
Palo Mayombe, 80-81 
Santeria, 49-50 
Voodoo, 95-96 
Wiccan religion, 19-20 
Grove, 19 
Guerreros, 52, 133 
Gurufinda, 74 


H 


Harmful implements, 39 
Hemlock, 32-33 

Herb Bennet, 32-33 
Herb of Circe, 32 

Herb of grace, 33 


142 


Herbalism 
Curanderismo, 119-120 
Palo Mayombe, 84-85 
Santeria, 64-65 
in Wiccan religion, 31-33 
Hereditary Wicca, 17 
Hogweed, 65 
Horned God, 129 
Horseshoe amulet, 120 


I 


Ibeji, 47, 61 

Idé, 66, 133 

Ifa, 47, 50, 134 

Iku, 52, 66, 134 

lle, 134 

Inkita, 85 

Inle, 48 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
offering to, 57 

Insolacion, 118 

Institutionalized sharing, 8 

Iya, 134 

Iyalocha, 51, 134 

Iyawo, 61, 134 


j 


Jesus Malverde, 113, 120 
Jewelry, 36-37 

Juan Soldado, 113 

Judas Tudeo, 112 

Juno’s tears, 33 


K 


Kalfu, 93 

Kalunga, 75 

Kariocha, 9, 53-54, 134 
Karma, 18, 134 
Kimbisa, 71 
Kobayende, 74 


L 


La Manito de Coral, 121, 122 
La Place, 98, 134 


Subject Index 


La Sirene, 92, 104 
Labrys, 129 
Lady, 134 
Lambrynth, 129 
Lave-tet, 134 
Law of Contact, 10, 11 
Legba, 90, 101, 104, 128 
Loa(s), 7, 90, 134 
Agassou, 92 
Agwe, 93 
Ayida Wedo, 92 
Ayizan, 91 
Azaka, 92 
Baron Samedi, 94 
Carrefour, 93 
Damballah Wedo, 92 
Erzulie Dantor, 94 
Ezili Danto, 94 
Ezili Freda, 92 
Gede, 94 
Gran Bwa, 93 
Kalfu, 93 
La Sirene, 92 
Loko, 91 
Mama Brigette, 95 
Marasa, 90 
Marinette-Bwa-Chech, 94 
Ogou Group, 93 
Petro, 93 
Rada, 90 
Simbi, 93, 94 
Sobo, 92 
Ti-Jean Petro, 94 
Lodestone, 121 
Loko, 91 
Los Tres Grandes, 114, 134 
Lucero, 74, 79, 130 
sacred vessel, 78 
Lucumi, 42, 53, 58, 61, 134 


M 


Macuto, 66, 134 
Madre de Agua, 75 

sacred vessel, 80 
Magic 

practices, 10 

in religious culture (See Magico- 

religious culture(s)) 

Magical Working, 11, 130, 135 
Magico-religious culture(s), 10-11 


Subject Index 


worldview, 10 
Mal Aire, 117 
Mal de Latido, 118 
Mal de Ojo, 8, 9, 117, 118, 120, 121, 134 
Mal djok, 105, 134 
Mal Dyok, 105, 134 
Malferefun, 134 
Malificia, 117 
Mama Chola, 74 
Mama Kengue, 74, 130 
Mama Nsasi, 74 
Mama Sholan, 78 
Maman Brigette, 95 
Mambo, 81, 82 
Voodoo, 94, 95, 96, 97, 106, 108, 134 
Mandrake, 32 
Manzanilla, 65, 120 
Marasa, 90 
Maravilla, 65 
Marinette-Bwa-Chech, 94 
Mariwanga, 74 
Marjoram, 65 
Masterwort, 32 
Mecheiso, 85 
Mejorana, 65 
Melarchico, 117 
Menga, 79, 81, 134 
Mercury, ritualistic use, 66, 87 
Milagro, 121 
Mohsian tradition Wiccan religion, 17 
Moral code, 7 
Mountain mugwort, 120 
Moyuba, 58, 134 
Mpungo (Spirits of nature), 74, 75, 80, 135 
Centelle Ndoki, 74 
Choya Wengue, 74 
Gurufinda, 74 
Kalunga, 75 
Kobayende, 74 
Lucero, 74 
Madre de Agua, 75 
Mama Chola, 74 
Mama Kengue, 74, 130 
Mama Nsasi, 74 
Mariwanga, 74 
Siete Rayos, 74 
Tata Nfumbe, 74, 130 
Tiembla Tierra, 74 
Zarabanda, 75, 78, 81, 130 
Mugwort, 33 
Mysticism, 8 
Myth, 9 


143 


N 


Naughty man, 33 
Neopaganism, 13-39 
religions of, 14-15 
Nettle, 33 
New Orleans Voodoo, 106-107 
Nganga, 2, 72, 73, 83, 135 
bones in, 75 
horn in transporting materials from, 85 
in initiation, 83 
responder responsibility when finding, 
86 
spaces for, 76, 77 
Nine Worlds, 127 
Nkisi, 72, 74, 135 
Nkobos, 135 
Nopal, 120 
Nzambi, 73, 74, 135 


O 


Obatala, 45, 63 
animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
offering to, 57 

Obi, 54-55, 135 

Oblibanum, 33 

Ochosi, 45, 57, 61 

Odin’s Rune, 127 

Offerings, 27 
Santeria gods, 57 

Ogan, 98 

Ogou group, 93, 101, 104, 128 

Ogun, 45 
animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
necklace, 51 

Oko, 48 

Olokun, 46, 63 

Orange Leaves, 120 

Order, 19 

Orishas, 74, 75, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135 

Orula/Orunmila, 47 
celebration day, 61 
necklace, 51 
punishment, 63 

Osain, 47, 63, 64 

Oshun, 45, 47 


144 


animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebration day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
necklace, 51 
offering to, 57 
Otan, 53, 54, 135 
Our Lady of Guadalupe, 110-111 
Oya, 45-46 
celebration day, 61 
offering to, 57 


P 


Packets, 98 
Padrino, 50, 135 
Palero/Palera, 77, 80, 85, 135 
Palo Christianos, 74, 135 
Palo Judias, 135 
Palo Mayombe, 71-87 
articles of comfort, 85-86 
beliefs and practices, 73-75 
bones in, 75-76 
cano brava in, 76 
Ceiba tree and, 86 
Chamba, 84, 85 
divination, 81 
group structure, 80-81 
healing and sickness, 85-86 
Herbalism, 84-85 
initiation, 82-84 
Mpungo as spirits of nature, 74-75 (See 
also Mpungo) 
Nzambi as creator, 73 
responder issues, 86-87 
rituals and ceremonies, 81 
Rogacién de Cabeza, 86 
sacred spaces, 76-77 
sacrifices, 81-82 
symbols, 130 
Fula, 130 
Lucero, 130 
Magical Working, 130 
Mother Kengue, 130 
Nfumbe, 130 
Zarabanda, 130 
vessels, 78-80 
Pantheon, 9 
Parsley, poison, 32-33 
Partera, 116, 135 
Pataki, 9, 43, 52, 56, 135 
Pentacle, 21 


Subject Index 


Pentagram, 129 
Photograph, 27 
Piedra Iman, 121, 135 
Pigeon grass, 33 
Poison hemlock, 32-33 
Poison parsley, 32-33 
Poleo, 120 

Poppets, 36 
Poteau-Mitan, 135 
Prayer, 8 

Prenda, 81, 135 
Psychic attacks, 37 


R 


Rama, 49, 71, 135 
Rayado, 82, 136 
Recetas, 136 
Red Sanders, 32 
Regla de Ocha. See Santeria 
Religious culture 
anthropological terms, 9 
common elements, 7-8 
magic in (See Magico-religious 
culture(s)) 
Religious experience, 8 
Resguardo, 85, 136 
Responder issues 
behavior, 125 
communication, 125-126 
Curanderismo, 122-123 
generalizations, avoidance of, 126 
harmful implements, 39 
language, 125 
in Palo Mayombe, 86-87 
patience, 125 
patient behavior, 125 
responsibility when finding Nganga, 86 
in Santeria, 67-68 
in Voodooism, 107-108 
weapons, 39 
in Wiccan religion, 38-39 
Ritual(s), 8, 9 
area preparation, 22 
tools, 20-21 
consecration of, 22 
Wiccan religion, 20-21 
Ritual body art, 36 
Rompe Saraguey, 65 


Subject Index 


S 


Sabbat, 25, 136 

Sacred object and place, 8 

Sage, 34, 38, 120 

Sahumerio, 118, 136 

Salt, 27 

San Martin Caballero, 111, 112 

San Martin de Porres, 111 

San Simon, 113 

San Toribio Romo, 113 

Sandalwood, 32 

Sangre Debil, 118 

Santa Marta, 113 

Santeria, 41-69 
ancestor reverence, 48-49 
animal sacrifices, 57-58 
articles of comfort, 66 
belief and practices, 43-49 
Brujeria, 60 


deities, 43-48 (See also specific gods) 


Aganyu, 47-48, 63 
Aggayu, 58 
Babalu-Aye, 46 
Chango, 45 
Elegua, 43-44 
Ibeji, 47, 61 
Inle, 48 
Obatala, 45 
Ochosi, 45, 57, 61 
Ogun, 45 
Oko, 48 
Olokun, 46, 63 
Osain, 47, 63, 64 
Oshun, 45, 47 
Oya, 45-46 
Yemaya, 46, 47 
Ebbo, 57-58, 133 
espiritismo, 59-60 
group structure, 49-50 
healing and sickness, 62-65 
head cleansing, 63 
methods, 63-65 
herbalism, 64-65 
High Priest, 42, 47, 50, 131 
history, 41-43 
holy days, 61-62 
Itutu, 62 
necklaces, 50-52 
common versions of, 51 


offerings and sacrifices, 56-57 


responder issues, 67-68 


rituals and ceremonies, 50-57 


cofa, 52 
Diloggun, 56 
Kariocha, 53-54 
mercury in, 66 
Obi, 54-56 
Patakis, 56 


receiving necklaces, 50-52 


warrior, 52 
sacred spaces, 62 
trance possession, 58-59 
Scapulario, 121 
Scented mayweed, 33 
Scourge, 21 
Seven Congos, 80 
Shamanism, 14 
Siam weed, 65 
Siete Rayos, 74 
sacred vessel, 78, 80 
Significance of human life, 7 
Simbi, 93, 94, 101 
Skyclad, 39, 136 
Smudging, 34 
Sobo, 92 
Sobrador, 115, 136 
Solar Cross, 128 
Spearmint, 65, 120 
Sporobolus, 65 
St. John’s plant, 33 
St. Joseph’s wort, 33 
Statues, 27 
Stinging nettle, 33 
Stones, 37 
Stregheria, 17 
Susto, 2, 117, 120, 136 
Sweat lodges, 36 
Sweet Basil, 120 
Swords, 98 
Symbols, 9, 127-130 


T 


Taboo(s), 9, 37-38 
Tambor, 61, 136 

Tata Nfumbe, 74, 130 
Te De Nurranjo, 120 
The Ibejis, 47 
Theurgy, 10 

Thor’s Hammer, 128 
Thyme, 32 


145 


146 Subject Index 


Ti-Bon Ange, 95, 105, 106, 136 Sobo, 92 

Ti-Bon Anj, 95, 105, 136 Ti-Jean Petro, 94 

Ti-Jean Petro, 94 Dominican, 106 

Tiembla Tierra, 74 drums, 98-99 
sacred vessel, 79 Congo, 98 

Trance possession, 10 Petro, 98 

Triple Goddess, 129 Rada, 98 

Tyre Rune, 127 entrance, 100-101 


group structure, 95-96 
health and sickness, 105-106 


V initiation, 102 
Manje Loa, 100-101 
Valknot, 127 marriage, 102 
Vervain, 33 New Orleans, 106-107 
Voodon, 136 responder issues, 107-108 
Voodoo, 89-108 rites of passage, 101 
altar, 103, 104 ritual tools, 96-99 
artifacts, 104 Asson, 96-97 
beliefs and practices, 89-98 bottles, 97 
ceremonies, 99-102 chromolithograph, 97 
entrance, 100-101 conch shell, 98 
initiation, 102 drums, 98-99 
Manje Loa, 100-101 flags, 97 
marriage, 102 Govi, 97 
Priye Ginen, 100-101 Ogan, 98 
rites of passage, 101 packets, 98 
spirit possession, 101-102 swords, 98 
deities, 90-95 triangles, 98 
Agassou, 92 zins, 98 
Agwe, 93, 101, 104, 128 sacred days, 102-103 
Ayido Wedo, 92 sacred spaces, 103-104 
Ayizan, 91 altar, 103, 104 
Azaka, 92, 101, 104 temple, 103 
Baron Loa, 104 spirit possession, 101-102 
Baron Samedi, 94 spiritual bodies and guardians, 95 
Carrefour, 93 symbols, 128-129 
Damballah Wedo, 92, 128 temple, 103 
Ezili Danto, 94, 101, 104 West African, 106 
Ezili Freda, 92, 104 zombies, 102 


Ezulie Dantor, 94, 128 
food offerings, 101 


Gede, 94, 101, 104 W 

Gran Bwa, 93, 129 

Kalfu, 93 Wand, 21 

La Sirene, 92, 104 Wanga, 98, 136 

Legba, 90, 101, 104, 128 Watchtower, 23, 136 
Loko, 91 Weapons, 39 

Maman Brigette, 95 West African Voodoo, 106 
Marasa, 90 Wheel of the Year, 129 
Marinette-Bwa-Chech, 94 White star, 33 

Ogou group, 93, 101, 104, 128 Wiccan religion, 13, 14 


Simbi, 93, 94 Alexandrian, 16, 19 


Subject Index 


altar, 26 
articles of comfort, 36-37 
amulets, 36 
jewelry, 36-37 
stones, 37 
beliefs, 17-18 
British Traditional, 16 
cakes and wines, 24 
calling the quarters, 23 
candles, 34-35 
Celtic, 16 
ceremonies, 21 
circle 
banishment of, 24 
casting the, 22-23 
correspondences, 21-22 
deities, 15, 18 
aspects, 131 
female, 15 
destruction of illness, 35-36 
poppets, 36 
ritual body art, 36 
sweat lodges, 36 
Dianic, 16 
Eclectic, 16 
energy raising, 24 
ethics, 18-19 
first responder issues, 38-39 
Gardenarian, 16-17 
Georgian, 17 
grounding, 22 
group structure, 19-20 
healing techniques, 29-33 
absent, 31 
aromatherapy, 29 
auric, 29-30 
chakras, 31 
chanting, 29 
cord healing, 29 
herbalism, 31-33 
Hereditary, 17 
history, 15-16 
holy days, 25-26 
Beltane, 26 
Imbolc, 25 
Lammas, 26 
Litha, 26 
Mabon, 26 
Ostara, 26 
Samhain, 25 
Yule, 25 
illness, 35-36 
invocation of deity, 23 


Mohsian tradition, 17 
rites of passage, 24-25 
coming of age, 24 
funeral, 25 
handfasting, 24-25 
wiccaning, 24 
ritual body art, 33 
rituals, 21 
tools, 20-21 
sacred places, 26-29 
objects at, 27-28 
smudging, 34 
sources of sickness, 37 
cursed objects, 37 
psychic attacks, 37 
spellwork, 24 
Strega tradition, 17 
symbols, 129 
Horned God, 129 
Labrys, 129 
Lambrynth, 129 
Pentagram, 129 
Triple Goddess, 129 
Wheel of the Year, 129 
taboos, 37-38 
traditions, 16-17 
Widdershins, 23, 24, 136 
Witch hazel, 65 
Witches herb, 33 
Worldview, 9 


Y 


Yemaya, 46, 47 
animal sacrifice for, 58 
celebrations day, 61 
divine punishment, 63 
necklace, 51 
offering to, 57 
Yerba Buena, 65, 120 
Yerbero, 116, 136 
Yunkagua, 85 


Z 


Zarabanda, 75, 130 
sacred vessel, 78 

Zins, 98 

Zombies, 102 


147 


FORENSICS AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE 


E) 


ay 





Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities 
A Guide for First Responders 


A woman lays unconscious on the floor surrounded by charcoaled symbols, burning candles, 
a bowl of viscous red liquid, and an array of dried herbs. Was this a healing ritual gone wrong 
or just straightforward foul play? Increasingly, first responders must deal with foreign practices 
and cultures that are often disturbing in their unfamiliarity. Understanding cultural variations 
and nuances can make the difference between much-needed emergency treatment and the 
aggravation of an already sensitive situation. 


Providing a cultural bridge for emergency personnel when interacting with various magico- 
religious cultures, Magico-Religious Groups and Ritualistic Activities: A Guide for First 
Responders 


* Draws from cultural anthropology and religious studies to unearth hidden meanings 
and contextualize the information 


* Introduces the importance of trans-cultural communication 
* Offers crucial keys to assessment and treatment in culturally sensitive circumstances 
* Discusses Neo-Paganism, Santeria, Bantu religion (Palo Mayombe), Voodoo, and Curanderismo 


* Investigates sacred spaces and dates, ceremonies, group structure, sacred objects, 
healing rituals, worship, and cultural taboos 


* Includes a detailed review of the common herbs, a glossary of cultural terms, 
and an index of symbols 


* Provides more than 50 photographs for visual identification 
Emphasizing functional cultural competency, this book gives public service agencies and 


emergency responders the tools to properly assess situations, open lines of communication, 
protect cultural diversity and beliefs and, above all, provide effective emergency treatment. 


518685 


ISBN 1-4200-518b-5 
| 90008 


i 2 Park Square, Milton Park 
-taylorandfrancisgroup.com | A nadon Oxon OX14 4RN, UK WWW- CTC press.com 


Taylor & Francis Group 270 Madison Avenue 
an informa business New York, NY 10016 9178 1420"05 1 865l 





6000 Broken Sound Parkway, NW 
(#9) CRC Press Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487 


